<div class="blockquote30em">

<p class="noindent"><span class="it">To Norman Kenneth Stephen, late Senior
Assistant Master of Harrow School, who was
the first to show me that, though few can
bend it, the long bow of English is on every
man’s back, this book is respectfully and
gratefully dedicated.</span></p>

</div>

<div><h1 class="nobreak"><span class="it">CONTENTS</span></h1></div>

<table id="tab2" summary="" class="center">
<tr><td class="tab2c1 tdStyle2"></td><td class="tab2c2 leader-dots tdStyle3"><span> </span></td><td class="tab2c3 tdStyle2"> </td></tr>
<tr><td class="tab2c1 tdStyle2"><span style="font-size:x-small">CHAP.</span></td><td class="tab2c2 tdStyle3"></td><td class="tab2c3 tdStyle2"><span style="font-size:x-small">PAGE</span></td></tr>
<tr><td class="tab2c1 tdStyle2">I.</td><td class="tab2c2 leader-dots tdStyle3"><span>THE WELL-DIGGER’S STATEMENT</span></td><td class="tab2c3 tdStyle2"><a href="#Page_9">9</a></td></tr>
<tr><td class="tab2c1 tdStyle2">II.</td><td class="tab2c2 leader-dots tdStyle3"><span>THE WAY TO WAGENSBURG</span></td><td class="tab2c3 tdStyle2"><a href="#Page_40">40</a></td></tr>
<tr><td class="tab2c1 tdStyle2">III.</td><td class="tab2c2 leader-dots tdStyle3"><span>THE BATTLE WITH THE SPRINGS</span></td><td class="tab2c3 tdStyle2"><a href="#Page_73">73</a></td></tr>
<tr><td class="tab2c1 tdStyle2">IV.</td><td class="tab2c2 leader-dots tdStyle3"><span>THE ATTACK ON THE WELL</span></td><td class="tab2c3 tdStyle2"><a href="#Page_108">108</a></td></tr>
<tr><td class="tab2c1 tdStyle2">V.</td><td class="tab2c2 leader-dots tdStyle3"><span>WE GO TO GROUND</span></td><td class="tab2c3 tdStyle2"><a href="#Page_136">136</a></td></tr>
<tr><td class="tab2c1 tdStyle2">VI.</td><td class="tab2c2 leader-dots tdStyle3"><span>TESTER GIVES TONGUE</span></td><td class="tab2c3 tdStyle2"><a href="#Page_178">178</a></td></tr>
<tr><td class="tab2c1 tdStyle2">VII.</td><td class="tab2c2 leader-dots tdStyle3"><span>‘ROSE’ NOBLE MOVES</span></td><td class="tab2c3 tdStyle2"><a href="#Page_212">212</a></td></tr>
<tr><td class="tab2c1 tdStyle2">VIII.</td><td class="tab2c2 leader-dots tdStyle3"><span>THE RACE FOR THE CHAMBER</span></td><td class="tab2c3 tdStyle2"><a href="#Page_248">248</a></td></tr>
<tr><td class="tab2c1 tdStyle2">IX.</td><td class="tab2c2 leader-dots tdStyle3"><span>OUT OF THE EATER</span></td><td class="tab2c3 tdStyle2"><a href="#Page_279">279</a></td></tr>
</table>

<hr class="pbk" />

<div><span class="pageno" title="9" id="Page_9"></span><h1>CHAPTER I       THE WELL-DIGGER’S STATEMENT</h1></div>

<p class="noindent"><span class="lead-in">When</span> the first of these things happened, that is to
say upon the twentieth day of April, 192-, I was
twenty-two years old, a little stronger than most
men of my age, and very ready for anything that
bade fair to prove more exciting than entering the
office of my uncle, who was a merchant of consequence
in the City of London.</p>

<p>I had lately been sent down from Oxford for
using some avowed communists as many thought
they deserved, and, though George Hanbury—for
he had been with me in the affair—and I received
much sympathy and more complimentary letters
from complete strangers than we could conveniently
answer, I think we were both more distressed than
we would have cared to admit to take our leave of
Christchurch before our time. For my part, I had
been glad to get out of England and to put the matter
as far away from my mind as ever I knew.</p>

<p>I had, then, spent five weeks at Biarritz, the
guest of some people called Pomeroy, with whom,
such was their benevolence, I believe I might have
stayed indefinitely; but a letter from Hanbury,
with whom I was to share a flat, threatening to
forego the agreement if I did not return to Town,
at length precipitated my departure.</p>

<p>I returned as I had come, alone in my car, making
for Dieppe and spending the first night at Angoulême
and the second at Tours.</p>

<p>From Tours to Dieppe is a comfortable day’s run,
and I rose that April morning, intending to pass my
third night on the packet which should take me to
England.</p>

<p>I left Tours about ten in the morning and came
to Chartres at one. There I purchased my luncheon
and, after taking in petrol, re-entered the car, for
the weather was very fair, and I meant to eat by
the way.</p>

<p>Accordingly, a few miles farther, I stopped by
the side of the road, and, leaving the car, sat down
on a grassy bank to eat my meal.</p>

<p>It was a fine, smooth day, and the sunshine
seemed almost as hot as it had been at Biarritz.
The world, so far as I could see, I had to myself.
The road stretched white and empty and straight
for miles upon either hand.</p>

<p>I was never much of a trencherman when I had
to eat alone, and my meal—a <span class="it">pâté de Chartres</span> and
some fruit, and a bottle of beer—was soon done;
but, since I had plenty of time and the beer had
made me heavy, I lay down in the warm grass and
went to sleep.</p>

<p>I now know that I must have slept for near fifty
minutes before I was awakened by the voices of
two men, who were somewhere quite close to me.
They were speaking English, and from the speech
and the tone of one of them, it was clear that his
temper was out of hand.</p>

<p>“<span class="it">You</span>, by hell,” he was crying, and I think it was
the bitterness and the enmity with which he kept
investing the pronoun that brought me so wide
awake. “<span class="it">You.</span> And who are <span class="it">you</span>? <span class="it">You</span> choose,
do you? And what about us? Seven years I’ve
done—seven years out of my life. And the
others——”</p>

<p>“Your confinement,” said the other coolly,
“seems to have affected your brain. The secret’s
mine, and you know it. Why, because you’ve
been in prison, should I make it over to you?”</p>

<p>“Because we’re partners,” blurted the first. I
could hear him swallow. “That’s why.”</p>

<p>“Partners?” said the other. He laughed lightly.
“Let me refresh your memory. For five years I
led you, Ellis—you and the other four. I gave
you two-thirds of every cent we took. Then, one
day, you struck. You demanded five-sixths. When
I refused, you swore you’d work on your own—with
what result we know.” He laughed again.
“So much for partnership. Add, then, two points,”
he continued: “first—that I had the secret before
ever I saw your face, and, second—that at your
trial <span class="it">you tried to save yourself by letting me in</span>.”</p>

<p>I cannot describe the contempt with which these
last words were uttered, and Ellis was plainly stung,
for he let out a volley of protest, declaring that it
was not he that had done it, and that the papers
had reported the matter wrong.</p>

<p>“I was in Court,” said the other, and laughed
again. Then I heard him yawn. “And so, you
see,” he continued, “you can’t be surprised that
I don’t jump at the chance of making you free of
a fortune at my expense.”</p>

<p>I had at first been astonished that I could hear
so perfectly, for I was sure that the speakers were
upon the opposite side of the bank. Then I
perceived that I had my ear to a drain which must
give directly into the wood beyond, and that, if I
was minded to listen, I was ideally placed. But I
could, of course, see nothing, and to hear, yet not
see, these two fellows was more than I could endure.
I therefore rose from my gully and made my way
by inches to the grass which was growing long
upon the top of the bank. Into this I passed, like
a snake, with the utmost caution, for I could now
hear the voices almost as loud as before, and in a
moment I was looking down upon two men, who
were standing in a miniature glade, with the wood
thick about them, and the bank upon which I was
lying blocking the hither end.</p>

<p>The one was dressed in old tweeds, that had
been well cut: he was a slight, handsome man,
and wore a fair, close-cut beard: his eyes were
grey and steady: he looked a gentleman. His
arms were folded, and he was leaning against a
tree, lazily regarding the other as though he were
unclean.</p>

<p>The latter was a big, coarse man, soon to be fat.
He was flashily dressed, with a slip to his waistcoat,
and cloth-topped, patent-leather boots; and
all his clothes argued an elegant taste like that
of a blackamoor. His mouth was brutal, and his
small, black eyes were set close in his head, and I
remember wondering how two so different men
could ever have agreed together for so long as
five years.</p>

<p>Ellis was trembling with rage.</p>

<p>“You see,” said the other, “there’s really no
more to be said. For the moment, so far as I am
concerned, the treasure of Wagensburg will stay
where it is. Whether later on I shall lift it, I
really don’t know; but, if I do, that I shall seek
your assistance, Ellis, is most improbable. Of
course, you’re at liberty to go and look for yourself.
You know where it is—to within some four or five
miles,” and, with that, he took out tobacco and
started to fill a pipe.</p>

<p>I had never thought of such blasphemy as
that which his words provoked. Ellis spouted
imprecations, at once so dreadful and couched in
such filthy terms that, had he then and there
fallen dead, it would have seemed to me the natural
consequence of such iniquity.</p>

<p>The other heard him out, busy with his pipe.</p>

<p>Then—</p>

<p>“Eloquent as ever,” he said. “Can you find
your own way back? Oh, and by the way,” he
went on, not waiting for any reply, “don’t come
here again, or anywhere that I am. I have no use
for you, and I dislike your company.”</p>

<p>He whistled as though for some dog and started
to stroll down the glade, pausing for a moment
to bring a match to his pipe, and commanding my
great admiration by his insolent scorn of the
other’s violent and menacing demeanour.</p>

<p>I was, indeed, in the act of admiration when the
murder was done.</p>

<p>As the other hunched his shoulders above his
pipe, Ellis struck him high up to the right of the
spine, and, either from the force of the blow or
from the wound, the other fell down on his face
with a knife in his back.</p>

<p>The murderer staggered across him and nearly
fell over the body, bringing himself up against a
tree on the far side, panting with stress. So he
stayed for a second, with his knees loose and his
back flat against the trunk, staring at what he
had done. Then he raised his head, and his eyes
met mine.</p>

<p>I suppose it was natural that I did not seem able
to move. I seemed to be in a trance.</p>

<p>I watched him draw out a pistol and take
deliberate aim. I know his hand was unsteady,
and I think the bullet went high; but the shot
broke the spell that held me, and I heaved myself
back down the bank before he could aim again.</p>

<p>I was on my feet in an instant, but, though I
did not feel faint, I was shaking like a leaf. After
a moment, however, I flung myself again at the
bank, rather dazedly, but taking care to make
the top at a different place.</p>

<p>Ellis was gone.</p>

<p>The body lay as it had fallen, and a big Alsatian
was nosing and licking the face. Already there
was a great stain upon the back of the light, tweed
coat.</p>

<p>I leaped down lightly and, setting the dog aside,
turned over the body as gently as I could. I
remembered having read somewhere that you
should not withdraw a knife. The man was
breathing, so I carried him over and propped him
against the bank. Then I ran for my flask, which
was in the car. His eyes were half-open when I
returned, and his hand was on the dog’s collar,
and the dog’s head on his chest. I gave him what
brandy I could, but most of it ran over his chin.</p>

<p>“I saw the whole thing,” I said. “I’m sorry
I couldn’t warn you, but Ellis was too quick.”</p>

<p>The other smiled faintly.</p>

<p>“But I’ll get him,” I added fiercely. “Tell
me as much as you can.”</p>

<p>The other shook his head.</p>

<p>“Let him go,” he murmured. “Let him work
out his own damnation. How much did you
hear?”</p>

<p>“He wanted your secret,” I said. “The
Wagensburg treasure, you called it. And you
didn’t see the point.”</p>

<p>He smiled again.</p>

<p>“Are you fond of dogs?” he breathed.</p>

<p>“Yes.”</p>

<p>“Will you take care of mine?”</p>

<p>“I will.”</p>

<p>He nodded.</p>

<p>“Good man,” he whispered. Then, “Look in
her collar,” he murmured, “and you’ll find she
can pay for her keep.”</p>

<p>His eyes closed then, and he lay so still for a
while that I thought he was dead.</p>

<p>Suddenly—</p>

<p>“Raise me,” he said. I did so. “What’s
England like?” he said. “I haven’t been able
to go there for seven years.”</p>

<p>I tried to tell him.</p>

<p>“But the country’s the same,” he said thickly.
“The woods, and the meadows at sundown and——”</p>

<p>That was his last word, for a terrible rush of
blood came from his mouth, and he died as did
Falstaff, speaking of green fields.</p>

<p>His blood was all over my hands and the dog’s
coat, but I presently found a stream and cleansed
the two of us.</p>

<p>I had rather a business to keep the dog with
me, for, though she was timid, she would have
stayed with the corpse: but I turned a strap,
which I had, into a leash and, speaking her
kindly, tried to show that I was her friend. And
what with the excitement and horror of the whole
business, my efforts to keep out of sight of passing
vehicles, my constant outlook for Ellis and my
anxiety to avoid association with the murder that
had been done, I forgot to examine her collar for
several hours. And this was as well, for my mind
was full enough. Indeed, to this day, try as I
will, I cannot tell how I came to Rouen nor yet
to Dieppe. But I know that the car had been
shipped and that I was aboard, arguing about
quarantine, when I remembered the words of the
dead Englishman.</p>

<p>In the same instant it came to me that, for
such as had eyes to see, the collar was directly
connecting me with the crime. As soon as
convenient, therefore, I went up on deck, cut the
leash down to a collar and, making the change in
fear and trembling, stuffed the stout original into
my coat pocket, out of which, do what I would,
it bulged terribly.</p>

<p>Indeed more than once I came within an ace of
dropping it overboard.</p>

<p>It was in my mind to say that I had found the
dog collarless on the highway, and that was the
tale I told at Newhaven as carelessly as I could.
But, while I told it, I sweated, and the collar in
my pocket felt like a packing-case.</p>

<hr />

<p>It was late when I reached London, for there
was no one at Newhaven who was licensed to
receive the dog, and, though I might have left
her in her hutch to await the coming of the carrier
for whom I had sent, I had not the heart to do so.
I have never seen a dumb animal, that was not
bodily sick, in such evident distress. She would
neither eat nor lie down, but sat for the most part
with her head drooped, staring upon the ground.
If ever I made to leave her, she would look at me
so miserably that I spent the whole of the morning
seated on a box by her side, and, when at length
the carrier took her in charge, I could not meet
her gaze, but, muttering some words of comfort,
patted her hanging head and hurried away.</p>

<p>I drove straight to ——’s Hotel, there to find
a letter from Hanbury asking me to dine that
night at his father’s house. I accepted
immediately. Indeed, the invitation was just what
I wanted, for I had already determined to tell
Hanbury all that had happened to me the day
before and to share with him whatever a scrutiny
of the dog-collar might disclose.</p>

<p>And here I may say that I looked at the collar
in my bedroom at ——’s Hotel, but could see
nothing at all unusual within or without. The
plate was engraved with a date, 17-10-16, which,
I supposed, meant something to the dead man,
but, except that it was un-English, there was
nothing about it which called for any remark.
I was sure, however, that when the leather was
opened, we should find something within, and I
hoped very much that this would prove of more
interest than a hundred-pound note.</p>

<p>By the time I had bestowed the car and had
bathed, it was six o’clock; so I put on evening
clothes and, slipping the collar, which I had tied
up with string so that it lay pretty flat, into my
pocket, walked to the Club of which I had quite
recently been elected a member.</p>

<p>It was unlikely that news of the murder would
yet have reached England: for all that, I scanned
every evening paper carefully; but there was
nothing in any of them about the crime.</p>

<p>I was to dine at eight, but so soon as I had done
with the papers, such was my impatience to see
Hanbury that I felt I could wait no longer, and,
very soon after seven, I went to the members’
lobby where I had left my coat.</p>

<p>My coat was gone.</p>

<p>For a moment I stared blankly at the peg on
which it had hung: then I began to go feverishly
about the cloakroom, plucking at coat after coat
which at all resembled mine and hoping desperately
to come upon it.</p>

<p>I could only think that some member had made
a mistake, for the Club was above suspicion and I
could not believe that a stranger would have been
so bold or so successful. Yet I was worried to
death, because whoever had taken the coat was
bound to find the collar and certain to remark the
inscription upon the plate. Indeed, I saw myself
going down to a very sea of troubles, for, you will
remember, I had sworn I found the dog collarless,
and thereby put myself on the wrong side of a
matter the truth of which Ellis and I alone knew.</p>

<p>I had made my vain tour of the lobby and was
standing there hot and helpless, wondering what
I should do, when a tall, nice-looking man limped
into the room.</p>

<p>I suppose my face told my story, for he looked
straight at me and smiled.</p>

<p>“I’m awfully sorry,” he said.</p>

<p>Then he slid out of his coat and held it for me
to put on.</p>

<p>I stared like a fool.</p>

<p>“It’s yours, isn’t it?” he said. “<span class="it">Dog-collar
in the right-hand pocket?</span>”</p>

<p>“That’s right,” I blurted somehow.</p>

<p>Then I turned round and he helped me into the
coat.</p>

<p>“And a good thing too,” he said. “But for that
collar, I very much doubt if you’d ever have seen
it again. It’s exactly like mine. I didn’t know
there were two such good garments about. And
this doesn’t mean I’m not sorry, because I am.
It was most careless of me.”</p>

<p>I assured him that it did not matter and would
have gone, but he detained me by talking, whilst
he was finding his coat, and, when we went
into the hall, he laid a hand on my shoulder and
called a page.</p>

<p>“My name is Mansel,” he said gravely. “I
beg that you’ll drink with me.”</p>

<p>I found it difficult to refuse, so I said I would
take a cocktail, and we went and stood by the fire
and I told him my name.</p>

<p>When we had drunk, he turned.</p>

<p>“I must make a confession,” he said. “I’m
very interested in the date upon your dog-collar.
Why did you put it there?”</p>

<p>There were a thousand answers: but I had not
one upon my tongue. Yet, if I had been ready,
I do not think I should have lied again. Honestly,
I was rather grateful that the blow had fallen so
soon, for, at least, in this way I had the chance of
telling my tale before the papers told theirs, and
Mansel had the look of a capable friend.</p>

<p>“I didn’t put it there,” said I.</p>

<p>“Ah,” said he, and waited.</p>

<p>“I can’t tell you now,” I went on, “because
it’s too long a story, but if you’ll make an appointment . . .”</p>

<p>“Any time after ten to-night,” he said, and,
with that, he gave me his card.</p>

<p>This bore the address of a flat in Cleveland Row.</p>

<p>“Can I bring a friend?” I said suddenly.</p>

<p>“Why certainly,” said he.</p>

<p>We parted then, and I went to my dinner with
George.</p>

<p>To him I said nothing, except that I had an
engagement that night for both of us. He looked
at me rather hard, but asked no questions, and at
a quarter to ten we set out for Cleveland Row.</p>

<p>Looking back, it seems more than strange to me
that upon such a little matter as a couple of similar
overcoats, hung up upon neighbouring pegs, should
have depended life and death and fortune. But
so it fell out. For Jonathan Mansel was, I think,
the only man in the world who could have captained
our enterprise and brought it through such
vicissitudes to a triumphant end.</p>

<hr />

<p>Mansel and George Hanbury listened to my tale
without a word.</p>

<p>When I had finished, Mansel sat back in his chair.</p>

<p>“I can’t tell you much,” he said. “But the
inscription on that collar is not a date. It’s a
number. The man you saw murdered was in the
secret service during the War. I knew him—as
‘Number 171016.’ He was known to be a crook
but he was a very good man. He’d a big future.
Then Ellis cooked his goose—saddled him with
four big robberies in open Court. They let him
get out of the country, but of course he couldn’t
come back. He was broken up, I heard, for his
heart was right in the game. I suppose that’s
why . . .”</p>

<p>He broke off and nodded at the collar.</p>

<p>For a while none of us spoke.</p>

<p>Then I took out a knife and passed it to Mansel.</p>

<p>“Will you open the collar?” I said.</p>

<p>We were sitting about a table, with the collar
before us and a light hung above.</p>

<p>Mansel cut some stitches and, little by little,
ripped the lining away. Almost at once some
yellow material appeared, very stained and wrinkled
and lying as flat against the collar as the lining
itself. I made sure this was padding, but, when
he had made the opening a little larger, Mansel got
hold of the stuff and pulled it out.</p>

<p>It was a piece of oiled silk and seemed to have
been part of a tobacco pouch, for, when it was
unfolded, it had the form of an envelope without
its flap. Within this again was a piece of thin
notepaper, of which when it was opened, we could
see three sides had been covered with a clear,
close-written hand.</p>

<p>Mansel read it aloud, while Hanbury and I
peered, one over either arm.</p>

<div class="blockquote">

<p><span class="it">Statement of Carl Ramek, well-digger, aged 92.</span></p>

<p><span class="it">My great-grandfather dug the great well of Wagensburg.
He and his brother dug it with their father, the
three working together in the great drought of 17—.
The well is ninety feet deep. The first spring rises
thirty feet down, so that normally there is sixty feet
of water. There is no well like it hereabouts. They
could not have got so deep but for the great drought.
All the work in the well was done by my great-grandfather
and his brother and their father alone. The
masons cut the stones as they were told and brought
them and the wood and the mortar to the top, but no
one went down except the father and his two sons.
That was by order of the Count. They used to sleep
at the Castle, whilst they were doing this work. Out of
the well there runs a shaft. The shaft leaves the well
about eighty feet down. It runs up at an angle into
a chamber. The chamber is just above the level of the
first spring. No one knew of the shaft except my
great-grandfather and his father and his brother and
the Count. The shaft was very difficult to dig. The
Count had an evil name and was very much feared.
He would go down into the well to see the work.
The rain came before the work was done, and the Count
was beside himself for fear that they would not be able
to finish it before the water came in. At the end they
were working day and night. This was because the
Count would let no one else go down the well. When
the shaft and the chamber were done, the four of them
went down one night when everyone else was asleep.
The Count had two leather bags. These were very
heavy. They got them down and up the shaft and
into the chamber. It was raining hard, and the water
was up to the shaft, and the next day it was above it.
The three finished the masonry of the well, but the
Count now allowed them helpers to keep the water
down. On their last night at the Castle the Count
killed two of the three with his own hands. My great-grandfather
escaped, and though a long search was
made for him he was never found. He escaped into
Italy and returned two years later, when the Count
was dead. He always meant to go down and get the
bags, but there was never another drought severe
enough to empty the well. When he was dying he told
my grandfather this, and my grandfather told my
father and he told me. I don’t know which way the
shaft runs. There are steps in the shaft. The
Count cannot have recovered the bags because the
great drought was followed by three very rainy years,
and, as the springs are normally abundant, he could
not have emptied the well without employing a lot of
labour. I am unmarried and I have never told this
to anyone else.</span></p>

<p class="noindent"><span class="it">NOTE. The Count was clearly the notorious Axel
the Red, who was nothing more or less than a common
robber, and was reputed to have amassed a vast fortune.
In 1760 Wagensburg was burnt and he perished in
the flames. The castle passed to the Crown, and
was sold twenty years later. It was then restored.</span></p>

<p><span class="it">Wagensburg lies in Carinthia twenty-nine miles
from Villach and four from Lerai.</span></p>

<p class="line0" style="text-align:right;margin-right:4em;"><span class="it">September, 1904.</span></p>

<p class="noindent"><span class="it">NOTE. W. came into the market in 1910.</span></p>

<p class="line0" style="text-align:left;margin-left:3em;"><span class="it">Failed. Ellis knows.</span></p>
<p class="line0" style="text-align:right;margin-right:4em;"><span class="it">June, 1910.</span></p>

</div>

<p>I stood up and looked at George.</p>

<p>“Well,” I said, “when do we start?”</p>

<p>George Hanbury shrugged his shoulders.</p>

<p>“Your time’s my time,” he said.</p>

<p>“And my time’s Mansel’s,” said I.</p>

<p>I have often wondered how I came to say such
a thing to a man upon whom, three hours before,
I had never set eyes. Yet I meant what I said:
and I think the truth is that the royalty of Mansel’s
nature had already subjected me, for I know that,
if he had said at once that he could not join us, I
should have been unreasonably dismayed.</p>

<p>Mansel rose from his chair and knocked out his
pipe at the grate. Then he stood up quite straight
and folded his hands.</p>

<p>“This may be a school-treat,” he said, “and it
may not. Treasure and trouble frequently go
together. I haven’t been Villach way since the
year before the War, but unless things are very
different to what they were—well, if you fought a
duel with a couple of Lewis guns, nobody’d take
the trouble to come and see what it was. As
likely as not they wouldn’t hear you. It’s not at
all crowded. Well, that’s all right for a school-treat.”
He stopped there for a moment. Then
he proceeded thoughtfully. “Life’s full of twists
and turns, but to take on a job like this is to tackle
Blind Corner itself: and that’s a turning where
danger signs and warnings are little worth, for all
the care in the world won’t help you to see ahead,
and it’s never policed. Whether you two are free
to go is your affair. I will go—upon one condition,
which I see slight reason why you should accept.
The condition is that from first to last in this
venture you two will do what I say. You see,
I’m older.”</p>

<p>I thought the condition a very mild one and
said as much: so did Hanbury. But it has occurred
to me since that I should have found it presumptuous
in anyone else.</p>

<p>Be that as it may, we gave our word to obey him
in every particular, and then we sat down at his
feet while he rough-hewed our campaign.</p>

<p>Of this, he showed that there would be three
phases. First, the acquisition of Wagensburg:
then, the lifting of the treasure: and, lastly, the
disposal of it. And, since all he said was very
much to the point, I will use, so far as I can recall
them, his very words.</p>

<p>“The first thing to do is to buy the property.
Until we’re the landlords, the treasure is not ours
to lift. To rent the place may be simpler and, so,
tempting: but I don’t see the force of finding a
King’s ransom for somebody else. If Wagensburg’s
in the market, well and good. I’ll find the money:
I don’t think the price will be high. If it’s not in
the market, we shall have to pay more than it’s
worth: but in these days you can usually buy a
place even if it isn’t for sale.</p>

<p>“To get to the treasure shouldn’t be difficult,
but, unless the well’s dry, I’m sure we can’t do it
alone. To keep pace with springs that give freely
is very hard work: it’s a very deep well: all wells
are dangerous. We may even find that we can’t
use the well at all, but must drive a new shaft
from above. Above all, it’s most important that
we should not be disturbed. We should only have
to be seen at work to be suspected. To my way of
thinking, it’s at least a six-men job. If we each
take a servant who’s honest and fit and game, we
shall get there quicker and better and much more
comfortably.</p>

<p>“How we shall dispose of the treasure is a matter
we can only decide when we see what shape it takes.</p>

<p>“So much for the plan of action.</p>

<p>“What turns the whole thing from an exercise
into a venture is the fact that <span class="it">Ellis knows</span>. Whether
we shall clash with him or not, we can’t possibly
tell. I hardly think it’s likely myself. Sooner or
later, of course, Wagensburg will draw Ellis as a
magnet draws steel. ‘Where your treasure is,’
you know. But, when a man’s just done a murder,
he usually lies pretty low: and, when he knows
that somebody saw him do it, he lies lower still.
For all that, what Ellis will not understand is why
you haven’t gone to the police. That will make
him think very hard. And, knowing that you
overheard what the dead man said, he may
attribute your silence to a wish to hide something
which reference to the police would disclose. In
which case we should clash . . . Because of this
possibility we’ve got to move on our toes, always
go the long way round and watch with both eyes.
Remember this. Whether he knows it or not,
we’re going to get in Ellis’s way. He may never
know it. But if he does know it, well, you’ve
seen what he does with people who get in his way—provided
they give him the chance.”</p>

<p>That was as much as he said at that time: while
I saw the force of most of it, I did not agree that
there was anything to fear from Ellis, for, though,
as I had reason to know, he was a desperate man,
I could not believe that he would challenge six
men at once and I was quite certain that if and
when he did he would lose his match.</p>

<p>Then we found pencil and paper and, taking the
well-digger’s statement, made a plan of the well
and did what we could to ‘place’ the chamber.</p>

<p>We were all agreed that it would be pleasanter
to reach the chamber by digging than by way of
the well. The shaft had been mostly full of water
for some hundred and sixty years: the chamber
had been sealed for the same period: and, if you must
visit places so long abandoned to Nature, it is very
much more agreeable to have the daylight at your
back. But, though the prospect of inspecting them
by lantern was not inviting, it was, I think, the
unmistakable likeness which the plan bore to a trap
that made us strive so hard to find out another way.</p>

<p>But we could not.</p>

<p>Without knowing the angle at which the shaft
had been driven and the direction in which it left
the well, we could make out no more than that the
roof of the chamber must lie about twenty-five
feet below ground and would most likely be
encountered not more than twenty and not less
than ten paces from the side of the well. This did
not sound so formidable to Mansel and me, but,
after a great deal of labour, George, who alone of
us laid any claim to mathematical powers,
demonstrated to our amazement that even that
would leave some eight hundred square yards to
be searched, and we gave up the attempt.</p>

<p>We studied the statement and the plan we had
made until we knew them by heart, and we raked
the former for inferences, until we had almost
deduced the proportions of the Count: but it was
not an unprofitable enterprise, for, by the time we
had done, it was plain that, when we went abroad,
statement and plan could both be left with some
Bank, because, short of loss of reason, nothing could
ever erase their particulars from our minds.</p>

<p>Then we discussed preparations and how soon
we could start, and the getting of the servants,
and what my uncle would say when told I was
going to travel during the summer months. But
we always came back to the treasure and the
chamber and the great well.</p>

<p>It was two o’clock in the morning before Mansel
sent us away, bidding us do nothing but get some
serviceable clothes and hold our tongues.</p>

<p>Unless he summoned us, we were not to see him
for a week, but then we were to dine with him in
Cleveland Row. If all had gone well, he said, he
saw no reason why we should not start a week
from that day.</p>

<p>“One thing more,” he added, as we stood in his
hall. “The dog or the collar may link you up
with the crime. I think it unlikely. But at the
first breath of trouble come straight to me.”</p>

<p>I needed no such instruction. Mansel had
become the pillar of my state.</p>

<p>Indeed I had made up my mind to seek him the
moment I found anywhere a report of the murder.
But, though each day I searched the papers
faithfully, there was no mention made of it.</p>

<p>Nor was there at any time, so far as I saw. I
never read the French papers, but I often doubt
that the murder was reported at all. The venue
was lonely; the victim was foreign and had probably
few friends; and, if no great search was made, the
body may well have escaped notice, until there
was little for an unpractised eye to find irregular.</p>

<hr />

<p>The next day I visited the dog and found her in
good hands. The home to which she had been
taken was a famous establishment, with special
quarters for dogs in quarantine, and from the
condition and spirits of the many dogs I saw it
was plain that everything possible was done to
lighten their confinement.</p>

<p>The poor animal was delighted to see me, and,
observing her pleasure, the kennel-man was quick
to bring her some fresh food in the hope that she
would now break the fast she had stubbornly
maintained. To our relief she did so and soon
left her plate clean, and though, when I went
away, she made frantic endeavours to follow, the
man insisted that she would pine no longer and that,
when next I came, I should find her a different dog.</p>

<p>I am glad to say this came true: and, by the
time I left England, she was eating regularly and
seemed contented with her lot.</p>

<p>To my surprise, the interview I had with my
uncle passed off smoothly enough. He certainly
gave me no blessing, but, beyond remarking that
six months in the City of London were of more
value than twice that time spent in “knocking
about” Europe, he made little protest against the
postponement of my apprenticeship. He then sat
down and wrote me out a cheque for three hundred
pounds, and, when I stammered my thanks, he
said very gravely that that was a present for
“singeing the King of Spain’s beard.” At first I
could not think what he meant, but afterwards I
realised that I owed both money and favour to my
discomfiture of the communists, whose doctrines
and practices he held in great abhorrence.</p>

<p>The week of inaction to which Mansel had
committed Hanbury and myself passed very slowly,
and there were moments when we felt almost
mutinous. But, when we began to discuss the
preparations which we should have been making,
if Mansel had not told us to hold our hands, the
wisdom of his order became immediately plain,
for we were soon out of our depth and invariably
quarrelled over the very vulnerable plans we laid,
till the only matter upon which we were entirely
agreed was the vanity of each other’s proposals.</p>

<p>On the last day but one, however, a note from
Mansel came to salve my impatience. In this he
said that he had found a man whom he thought I
might like to be my servant, that the latter would
call upon me at ten on the following day and that
I was to examine him thoroughly from every point
of view, <span class="it">for</span>, the letter concluded, <span class="it">although I will
answer for his past</span>, <span class="it">he is particularly to serve you
and you will be responsible for his engagement</span>.</p>

<p>I soon found that Hanbury had received a
similar note, and this real evidence of progress
excited us out of all reason. At the same time we
were both a little uneasy at the thought of taking
a decision which, if it proved mistaken, might be
the undoing of us all. Of any man who was
admitted to our secret would be required a discretion
and loyalty which were to-day uncommon and
might easily be called upon to bear an extraordinary
strain. To recognize these qualities in repose
demanded an insight which we knew very well
indeed we did not possess. To add to our concern,
we did not know what Mansel had told the
candidates and whether we ought to disclose that
the service they were ready to enter was no ordinary
one. In the end we sent him a note, asking for
directions, but, though he received it, he sent no
answer at all, but only, as he afterwards told us,
pitched it into the fire.</p>

<p>We had, therefore, to use our own judgment as
best we could, but that we engaged Bell and Rowley
and that they turned out so well cannot be counted
to our credit, for I think an idiot could have seen
the stuff of which they were made.</p>

<p>Bell was my servant. He was a quiet, little
man, very sturdily built. He was serious and
well-spoken, but, though he was respectful, he had
none of the manner of a servant and looked like a
countryman turned clerk, which I afterwards
found he was. He seemed to notice nothing, yet
was exceptionally observant, and he always wore the
same agreeable, but something resigned expression,
as though his face were a mask. I never knew him
volunteer a statement unless he thought it might be
of service: he never once complained: he was most
faithful, and I think he thought Mansel was a god.
In this tenet he was not peculiar. Rowley and
Carson, Mansel’s servant, held the same view.</p>

<p>I shall ever remember our dinner with Mansel,
if for no other reason, because it is the solitary
occasion upon which expectations which I knew it was
foolish to harbour have been so startlingly exceeded.</p>

<p>He gave us a short dinner, which was very well
cooked and served, and we drank a pink champagne,
which I believe was a very rare wine though I fear
that neither Hanbury nor I was old enough to
appreciate its quality, but only the fact that Mansel
was doing us honour. Throughout the meal our
venture was not mentioned, except that he said
he was glad that we liked the men he had sent, and
we talked for the most part of Oxford, “which,”
he said, “is the only place in the world where a
man may eat his cake and have it too, for the years
he wastes there are beyond measure profitable.”</p>

<p>It was after the cloth had been drawn and the
servants had left the room that he told us quietly
that all had “panned out” very well, and that, if
we had no objection, we would start in two days’
time. Before we had recovered from our astonishment,
he began to relate exactly what he had done,
wasting no words and in no way pretending to
authority, but, when they were not apparent,
giving his reasons for his actions and speaking as
though he were a staff-officer reporting to his
equal or senior the measures which he had taken
in accordance with orders received. The manifest
excellence of his forethought apart, how he had
accomplished so much was a sheer mystery to me
and ever will be, for I never in my life saw him
hurry or use the telephone, and he had spent the
week-end in Hampshire, as he always did when
living at Cleveland Row.</p>

<p>Be that as it may, our preparations were complete,
and we were to start on Thursday, that is, in two
days’ time.</p>

<p>I will not set down his tale of the arrangements
he had made, because they will presently appear,
but will only say that the servants were to take
our baggage to an hotel at Salzburg, that we were
to travel to the same town by car, and that such as
might desire to know our business were to be told
that Mansel was a great trout-fisherman and that
we were all three bound for the streams of Carinthia
to see what could be done in that quarter.</p>

<p>And here I may say that anyone who was told
this was shown one side of the truth, for Mansel
was more fond of fishing than of almost anything
else, and Hanbury and I learned our first lessons in
the art of angling not very far from Wagensburg itself.</p>

<p>That his preparations had involved a certain
outlay was clear, but, when we spoke of money
and stammeringly asked to be allowed to contribute
towards the expense, Mansel said that such matters
could wait till the treasure was found: however,
on our persisting, he promised to keep an account
and to consider two-thirds of all that he was
expending as our affair.</p>

<p>Then we gave him our passports, for he was to
look them over and have them ordered to his liking.</p>

<p>After that he brought out the well-digger’s
statement and the map we had made, and, when
we had studied them both for as long as we pleased,
he sealed them up in an envelope and asked me
the name of my Bank. I told him. Then he
wrote upon the envelope:</p>

<div class="blockquote">

<p>171016. <span class="it">This is the property of Richard William Chandos, and
is lodged for safe custody with the Manager of the Pall Mall
Branch of ——’s Bank,</span></p>

</div>

<p class="noindent">and gave it to me.</p>

<p>“You must lodge that to-morrow,” he said,
“and see that you get a receipt.”</p>

<p>This I promised to do.</p>

<p>Then, of course, we fell to talking of our venture,
but, after telling us something of the country in
the heart of which Wagensburg lay—for, though
he did not know the castle, he had stayed in those
parts for one summer before the War—Mansel
began to speak of trout and trout-fishing and very
soon had us engrossed in what he said, which, I
think, was just what he wanted, for, if we were to
set up for fishermen, it was as well that we should
know something of the art. And from trout he led us
to streams, and from streams to rivers, and thence,
naturally, again to Oxford, and there we stayed
very contentedly until it was time for us to go.</p>

<p>At ten on Thursday morning we were to meet
again—an engagement which Hanbury and I
would not have missed or exchanged for one of the
very bags which the Count had borne down the
well, for there we were to get into Mansel’s Rolls-Royce
and drive with him to Dover and so, by
France and Germany, clean into Carinthia.</p>

<p>Yet, as it happened, we did not keep that
engagement, and the plans which Mansel had laid
were unfulfilled: and the whole face of our
adventure was changed in the twinkling of an eye,
before it was ever begun. And all this, because I
stopped in the street to look into a window.</p>

<div><span class="pageno" title="40" id="Page_40"></span><h1>CHAPTER II       THE WAY TO WAGENSBURG</h1></div>

<p class="noindent"><span class="lead-in">It</span> was the next morning, when I was walking
down St. James’s Street on my way to the Bank,
that I stopped to glance at the maps which were
spread in a shop-window. I had done so many times
before, for I often went by that way and, though
I am no geographer, a map or a plan has for me
some attraction to which I invariably yield. I had
taken my look and was just about to pass on when
I suddenly observed before me a map of Southern
Austria, drawn to a large scale.</p>

<p>I was naturally most interested and at once
began to look for Wagensburg, for so large was the
scale that the property might well have been
marked: but, though I soon saw Villach, most of
the names were not at all easy to read, for the
country was plainly very mountainous and the
lettering was often lost against the heavy shading
of the heights. For all that, if I could have gone
closer I think I might soon have found the name I
was seeking, but the map was some way from the
glass, and I could not even stand fairly in front of
it, because of another idler, who was standing
before the window, regarding its wares. I waited
a moment or two, expecting that he would pass on,
but he did not, so I approached my face as close to
the pane as I could without flattening my nose,
in one last endeavour to locate the castle before I
gave up the attempt. At this, the other seemed
to notice my presence and turned to look at me,
and, when instinctively I glanced at him, I saw
that it was Ellis himself.</p>

<p>I do not know which of us was the more taken
aback, but Ellis was the first to recover and turn
away. For myself, I stood gaping and staring
after him, as he walked rather jerkily away towards
Piccadilly.</p>

<p>My first impulse was to follow him, though what
good that would have done I do not know: and
indeed I started uncertainly to hasten up the
street in his wake; but what design I had was
soon frustrated, for he entered a cab which was
crawling close to the kerb and was instantly driven
away.</p>

<p>I have often wondered what would have been
his feelings if he had known of the statement
which lay in my breast-pocket, while we were
shoulder to shoulder before the window, and
whether he would not have made some desperate
attempt to possess himself of the document there
and then: and, all things considered, I verily believe
he would have tried, for, because of that paper, he
had already put his neck in a noose, and, as the
saying is, a man may ‘as well be hanged for a
sheep as a lamb.’</p>

<p>The disappearance of Ellis must have restored
my wits, for I realized in a flash that the first thing
which I must do was to inform Mansel. I, therefore,
ran down the street to Cleveland Row and happily
found him in the act of leaving his flat.</p>

<p>Directly he saw me, he turned, and I followed
him through his hall and into the dining-room.</p>

<p>“Yes?” he said shortly.</p>

<p>I told my tale, and he frowned.</p>

<p>“I don’t know whether this is good luck or bad
luck,” he said. “But I think it’s bad luck. Any
way we must take no chances.” He thought for
a moment there. Then he went on: “Ellis now
knows for certain that Wagensburg interests you.
If your excitement was apparent, he may even
suspect that you hold the secret itself. That you
made no attempt to detain him wouldn’t weigh much
with me, because a good many people would hesitate
to seize a man in the West End for a murder
which nobody knows has been committed in France;
but he would probably ascribe your failure to
reluctance to court inquiry. So I’m glad you
followed him.”</p>

<p>“He didn’t see me,” I said.</p>

<p>“I expect the cab had a back window,” said
Mansel. “Any way, Ellis will act. He may even
try to watch.” He took out his case and lighted
a cigarette. “I’d like you and Hanbury to take
the boat-train to-morrow. And I’ll go over to-night.”</p>

<p>Then he gave me careful directions, told me on
no account to return to Cleveland Row and not to
walk alone after dark.</p>

<p>“You see,” he said, “you’ve lost Ellis, but you
mustn’t make sure that Ellis has lost you. I
rather expect he’s thinking of other things, but
you never can tell. And those cabs can turn on
sixpence.”</p>

<p>As I walked down Pall Mall, I felt as though
every step I took was marked by a hundred eyes.</p>

<p>I lodged the envelope at the Bank, and then
drove off to find Hanbury and tell him of the
change in our plans. Then we went out together
and bought two tickets to Paris for the following
day.</p>

<p>I do not suppose two men ever used their eyes
as we did from then until we saw Mansel again;
and that, I imagine, was just what Mansel wanted,
for, although I do not think he thought it likely
that I should be followed, he would have been very
glad to know what Ellis was doing and whether
the man was alone or going to work with a gang.
But Hanbury and I proved broken reeds, and,
when we rejoined him, we had nothing at all to
report: and this shows of how much use we were,
for it afterwards appeared that Ellis had turned
at the top of St. James’s Street and had driven
back to see me turn into Cleveland Row, that I
had been followed to the Bank, to Hanbury’s
father’s house and to Cook’s office, and that it was
only at Boulogne that touch with me had been
lost. And for that relief we had Mansel’s prevision
to thank.</p>

<p>At four that afternoon the commissionaire
attached to my Club brought me my passport and
took away all my luggage, both light and heavy;
and, when I left Town the next morning, the
suit-case I took with me held nothing but worn-out
clothes, for which I had no use. Of Hanbury the
same can be said. We left by the morning train,
and came to Boulogne about noon of a beautiful
day. We were soon off the boat and, since we
had reserved no seats in the Paris train, we made a
fuss of securing the ones we wanted as well as a
table for the first luncheon to be served. When
our luggage was up on the rack and the porters
had been dismissed, we strolled up and down the
platform, like everyone else, but, after a little, we
wandered on to the quay and presently out of
sight.</p>

<p>We made our way to a tavern in the heart of
the town, and there found Mansel’s Rolls-Royce,
and, within, Mansel himself, smoking and drinking
beer, and arguing with the host about the Battle
of the Somme. He had come that day from
Dieppe.</p>

<p>He seemed very pleased to see us, and ordered
luncheon at once, “for,” said he, “I want to be in
Strasbourg by dawn, and lie up there for the day.
I was watched out of London last night, and,
though they’ve lost me now, they’ll probably make
a fresh cast.”</p>

<p>“But what could they do,” said Hanbury, “if
they did pick you up on the road?”</p>

<p>“Why, what they have done,” said Mansel,
“not very far from Chartres. Don’t forget,” he
added, “that we three hold the secret which that
man held. And I think Ellis thinks we do.”</p>

<p>And there, I think, for the first time, it came to
me how great was the power of those two leather
bags which lay in the chamber of the great well,
and I seemed to see them as impassive, relentless
twin gods, bringing this man to death and holding
that man for the gallows and sending another four
or five pelting across a continent, like so many
thieves in the night, to God knows what fortune,
while, as for the hatred and malice and uncharitableness
which they were inspiring, even the compilers
of the Litany cannot have contemplated so
poisonous a flow of soul. But, though it seemed
very shocking, I felt very cheerful to think I was
one of the ‘thieves,’ and the thought of stealing
a march upon men so bold and determined as
Ellis and his friends, was like a glass of
champagne.</p>

<p>Whilst we were lunching, a basket was stocked
with provisions against our journey and then tied up
in two cloths because of the dust. Indeed, great
attention was paid us by the people of the inn, who
manifestly knew Mansel and thought the world of
him.</p>

<p>We all ate very well, while Mansel spoke of the car.
Of this he was plainly proud, and I was surprised
that he thought it wise to leave her alone in the
street. I said so presently, when he laughed and
asked me to fetch him a map which he had left on
its seat. I went to do so and found the car guarded
better than I had dreamed. As I leaned over the
side, a small, white dog rose from the driver’s place,
and, had I been the devil himself, I could not have
been accorded a more hostile reception. The whole
street rang with a storm of barking, and, if I had
taken the map, I should certainly have paid in blood
for my capture. At this, Mansel appeared and,
after making much of the terrier, a pure-bred
Sealyham, picked him up out of the car and put
him into my arms. I stroked and spoke to him,
and presently he licked my face.</p>

<p>“And now,” said Mansel, “he knows that you
are my friend and will let you come and go and do as
you please.”</p>

<p>Then he called Hanbury and made him free of the
dog’s confidence in the same way. After that, he
asked me, if I had done eating, to stay with the car,
because he wanted to give the Sealyham his lunch;
for he set great store by the terrier, as was very
proper, for I never saw a more attractive or intelligent
dog. His name was Tester, and I believe, so fine
was his instinct, that he understood every word that
was said to him and many that were not: and I
know that from that time on I was his most obedient
servant, and he my very good friend: but more
than that he never was, for Mansel was his master,
and he knew no other.</p>

<p>The car was a new model, and the coachwork had
been carefully done. It was, as Mansel said, a true
‘touring’ body, for, though it was slim to look at,
it had a great capacity and was so constructed that
two could sleep in it with ease and comfort, and,
when it appeared to be empty, its hidden lockers
concealed all manner of stuff not usually carried in
cars, but invaluable to a pioneer. There were
brandy and ‘first field-dressings,’ a medicine-chest
and bandages, lint and splints: but most important
in my eyes was a little armoury of weapons and
ammunition and handcuffs, “of which,” said
Mansel, “I hope we shall have no need; but I like
to think that they’re there.” Then he showed us
that in the driver’s pocket he carried a heavy pistol,
ready for use; and that, I think, completed my
conviction that Ellis was trying to play a losing
game and would very soon curse Wagensburg and
the day he first heard its name.</p>

<p>It was half past two when we left Boulogne for
Strasbourg, and a wonderful journey it was. I sat
with Mansel and Tester, and Hanbury sat behind.
It had been raining a little, but was now very fine;
the country through which we passed was agreeably
fresh and blowing; and the car had the way of a
swallow in the air. Mansel drove very fast, without
seeming to do so, and maintained an average of
forty-five miles to the hour with an astonishing precision.
He neither hurried through towns nor
showed any inconsideration to men or beasts upon
the road, but such time as he lost on this account
he won when the road was open, without any fuss,
for the car was willing, and he was a remarkable
judge of pace and distance, and, while he was yet
a great way from some predicament, could tell to a
hair what was within his power: and that is more
than most men can do.</p>

<p>When evening came and we began to see cows
being driven home, we turned down a lane and
stopped. Then Mansel and Hanbury alighted and
took Tester for a stroll, whilst I stayed with the car
and prepared our supper. This we ate easily, for
we were to stay there an hour. Except to take in
petrol, we did not stop again till we came to Strasbourg:
and that was at one o’clock. There was a
fine moon, and I remember looking up sleepily to
see how the old cathedral was lacking one of its
spires. We chose a small hotel in an unimportant
street, and only two rooms were taken, for Mansel
slept in the car in a garden at the back of the inn.</p>

<p>We had reached Strasbourg sooner than Mansel
had expected, and, though he had intended to stay
in that city till dusk, the thought of wasting the
whole of a valuable day was more than he could
endure, and by nine o’clock of that morning we were
again upon the road.</p>

<p>Our way now lay through The Black Forest and
was at times most solitary. Mansel drove with his
ears pricked, and if ever I spoke, begged me to hold
my tongue; but I could not share his vigilance and,
when we stopped for a moment by the side of the
way, asked him how Ellis could have had time to
contrive our pursuit or attack.</p>

<p>His reply was unanswerable.</p>

<p>“I could have done it,” he said, “with luck and
money and friends, and, though the first can’t be
bought, the other two can. Ellis had a secret to
sell. Be sure he’s sold it, for he couldn’t fight us
alone. Therefore, he has money and friends. And,
since the Castle of Wagensburg is plainly everyone’s
way, not to look out for us would be the act of a fool.
They know that we’re going direct, because we’ve
no time to spare. That suggests Strasbourg. So
somebody flies to Paris and gets to Strasbourg some
hours ahead of us. They can’t watch a city, but
they can watch the frontier posts. And, don’t
forget, <span class="it">buried treasure</span> is the very deuce of a goad.”</p>

<p>As he spoke, a very faint sound came to our ears.</p>

<p>It was the high-pitched note of a powerful electric
horn, as yet some distance away and between us and
Strasbourg.</p>

<p>Mansel had the Rolls moving before I was well in
my seat, and we were very soon doing some sixty
odd miles to the hour, but the next time I heard the
horn it sounded much closer, and, after a moment,
Mansel slackened his speed and let a closed car go
by. He was very careful, however, to keep this in
sight, and when, two or three miles on, we saw it
slow down and stop in the midst of the road, he
asked me to fasten Tester to a short chain which was
attached to the coachwork close to my feet.</p>

<p>As we approached, a man who had alighted from
the car spread out his arms as a signal to us to stop,
not in a peremptory manner, but rather as does a
man who is in need of assistance. Mansel waved in
reply and applied his brakes, but he overran the
closed car by nearly a hundred yards, before bringing
the Rolls to rest on the crown of the road.</p>

<p>Then we turned round in our seats and waited
for the stranger to move.</p>

<p>For a while he seemed to be expecting that we
should come back, but, when it was quite evident
that we were not going to move, he spoke for a
moment with someone within the car and then
began to walk in our direction.</p>

<p>“Hanbury,” said Mansel quietly, “watch that
car. The moment it moves, ask Chandos to give
you a match.”</p>

<p>The stranger was wearing dark glasses, which he
did not remove; his hair was fair and his complexion
ruddy. He was not very tall, and his hands were
coarse and rough. He walked jauntily and wore his
hat on one side.</p>

<p>As he came up, he gave us “Good day” in French,
and then very haltingly inquired if any one of us
could speak English.</p>

<p>“We are English,” said Mansel.</p>

<p>“Why, that’s fine,” said the other. Then very
calmly he asked us to come back and look at his
car, “for,” said he, “she seems to be nearly red-hot,
and none of us knows enough to change a wheel.”</p>

<p>“If she’s so hot,” said Mansel, “no one can help
you at all for half an hour. I should open both
sides of the bonnet and push her into the shade.
I’ll send you help from the very next garage I pass.”</p>

<p>“Now be a sport,” said the stranger, laying a
hand on the Rolls and casually lifting his hat.
“Come an’ ’ave a look at the swine.”</p>

<p>“Bill,” said Hanbury to me, “give me a match.”</p>

<p>“Shall I send you help?” said Mansel, as the
Rolls began to move.</p>

<p>The stranger’s answer was to try to apply the
hand-brake, but, as he was feeling for the lever, I
hit him under the jaw, and he fell back into the road.</p>

<p>Then the Rolls shot forward, and, as I was
unready, I fell myself upon Mansel, who was
laughing like a child at a circus, while Tester was
barking uproariously and trying to burst his chain,
and Hanbury was kneeling on the back seat,
shouting “Gone away” and making derisive
gestures with both hands.</p>

<p>Before I had got my balance, the closed car was
out of sight, but Hanbury told us, with tears, that
its occupants’ haste to alight, before it had stopped,
had done as much damage as I, for that, as a man
was descending from the front of the car, someone
behind him flung open the second door and that this
hit the one in the back and knocked him down and
then returned upon the other, who was himself half
way out. So it seemed that we had had very much
the best of the brush and that Ellis and his friends
had gained nothing but a couple of heavy falls: but
Mansel, when he had done laughing, began to frown,
“because,” said he, “though I’d sooner be before
than behind them, I’d very much sooner not be on
their road at all. Too many ‘circumstances over
which one has no control’ on the road to-day.”</p>

<p>The words were hardly out of his mouth, when we
rounded a bend to see a level-crossing ahead. And
the barriers were down.</p>

<p>When we were very near, Mansel stopped and
Hanbury and I leaped out. At once, as there was
no keeper, we endeavoured to raise the poles, but
these had been lowered by machinery, controlled,
I suppose, by some distant signalman, and were fast
locked into place.</p>

<p>“Never mind,” said Mansel quietly, stepping out
of the driver’s seat. “Chandos, you take my place,
and, Hanbury, sit by his side.”</p>

<p>With that, he climbed into the back and lighted
a cigarette.</p>

<p>We did as he said, and, the engine running, I sat
with my hand on the lever and my foot on the clutch
wondering what was to happen and reflecting rather
dismally that we had laughed too soon.</p>

<p>It was a quiet place, and the sunshine was very
hot. Except for the murmur of the engine, there
was no sound at all.</p>

<p>So we sat, waiting for the train or the closed
car.</p>

<p>Two minutes must have gone by before the latter
appeared, rounding the bend like fury and raising
a storm of dust.</p>

<p>“Don’t start till I say so,” said Mansel, and slewed
himself round on the seat.</p>

<p>The road was none too wide, and we were full on
the crown.</p>

<p>With my eyes on the driving mirror, I saw the car
approach.</p>

<p>It was in the driver’s mind to thrust alongside, but,
if he had done so, he could not have crossed the
metals, for the gate was less wide than the road; so
he brought his car to rest behind us and a little to
the right.</p>

<p>“If anyone moves,” said Mansel, “I’m going to
fire.” The windows of the car were open, so they
heard what he said. “You’ve tried to stop me by
force and you’ve pursued me; and at the first town
I come to I’m going to prefer a charge. My papers
are all in order; I’ve a licence to carry a pistol;
and my luggage is in the car. Perhaps you can say
the same. If you can’t, you’ll be detained—pending
inquiries.”</p>

<p>“Bluff,” said someone.</p>

<p>“Then call it,” said Mansel.</p>

<p>“You’ve assaulted us,” said another. “I asked
you a civil question, an’ you slogged me under the
jaw. An’ you talk about the police.”</p>

<p>“Yes,” said Mansel, “I do. Because my record’s
clean. Then again, I speak German quite well; and
that’s a great help.”</p>

<p>“Bluff,” said the first speaker. “You know as
well as I do that you won’t go to the police. You
can’t afford to.”</p>

<p>“If you mean,” said Mansel, “that I don’t want
to waste my time, that’s perfectly true.”</p>

<p>“I don’t,” said the other. “I mean that, much
as you like ’em, the last thing you want just now is
to catch the eye of the police.”</p>

<p>Mansel raised his eyebrows.</p>

<p>“I’m not going to argue,” he said, “but I can’t
help thinking that you’re mistaking me for somebody
else. Excuse me,” and, with that, he fired.</p>

<p>The silence which succeeded the explosion was
that of the grave. I had, of course, jumped violently
and now sat still in my seat, as if under a spell,
though my heart was pounding like a labouring pump
and I was expecting every instant the shock of battle.
But this did not come. So far as I could see by the
mirror, those in the closed car were sitting as still as
I, and, after a moment or two, Mansel spoke
again.</p>

<p>“The next time anyone moves, I shall try to hit
him,” he said. “And I think perhaps it would be
better if you all four folded your arms. Thank
you.”</p>

<p>“To-day to you,” said the man who had spoken
last.</p>

<p>“Indubitably,” said Mansel.</p>

<p>Then we were left to our thoughts, and to wonder
if ever the train was coming by.</p>

<p>I was disquieted.</p>

<p>Mansel had spoken boldly, but you cannot make
bricks without straw, and the man who had taken
him up was not even shaken, very much less
deceived. For the moment we had them in check, but
the changes and chances of the road were manifold,
and, unless we could run right away, as like as not
we should be cornered again. And the next time
they would be more careful.</p>

<p>It was while I was thinking of these things that I
happened to lower my eyes to the mat at my feet,
and there, beneath me, I saw an adjustable
spanner. Mansel had used it that morning to
tighten a bolt, and, in his haste, had omitted to
put it away.</p>

<p>Shakespeare has said somewhere that ‘the sight
of means to do ill deeds, Makes deeds ill done.’ So
it was with the spanner. For directly I saw it, I
thought that here was the means to spoil the petrol-tank
of the closed car and so put the enemy out of
action.</p>

<p>I picked up the spanner, slid this into my pocket
and turned to Hanbury.</p>

<p>“Take my place,” I said quietly. “I’m going to
disable their car.”</p>

<p>Hanbury blinked once or twice and gulped as
though he would protest, so soon as he found his
tongue; but I opened my door and stepped out
without more ado.</p>

<p>I sauntered up to the barrier and glanced up and
down the rails. Then I turned round and looked
at the two cars.</p>

<p>Hanbury was in my place and Mansel did not seem
to have moved. He was sitting easily sideways,
covering the car with his pistol and supporting his
right wrist with his left arm. The four men, of
whom Ellis was not one, were wearing blue glasses
and sitting like images, with folded arms.</p>

<p>I stepped to the radiator of the Rolls, unscrewed
the cap and peered within. Then I frowned and,
spanner plainly in hand, stooped as though to tighten
the plug. After appearing and disappearing once
or twice, I replaced the cap, still frowning, and
disappeared again. A moment later I was beneath
the car. It was a tight fit, but the pulse of the closed
car’s engine covered the noise I made. I worked
along on my back as best I could, until my head was
level with the Rolls’ hind wheels. To pass from
beneath the Rolls to beneath the closed car meant
crossing about six feet of open road, but there was
not more than a yard between the two cars’ wings,
and, though, from where I lay, I could see the hat
of the man beside the driver, I judged that, unless
he moved, the strip of road I must pass was just out
of his sight. So, since to see where I was going was
now essential, I turned very gently upon my face
and took a deep breath. Inch by inch I covered
those six feet of open road, and I must admit that I
did it with my heart in my mouth, for I could by
no means be sure that I was not in some view, and,
though I hoped for the best, once one of the enemy
knew that I was beneath their car, pistol or no, it
was most unlikely that they would make no attempt
to learn my business.</p>

<p>At last, however, it was over, and I was well out
of sight and under the closed car.</p>

<p>I turned again upon my back, and there I lay for
a moment to get my breath, for the strain of moving
so flat upon my face had been exhausting, and the
heat and noise of the engine at such close quarters
had been unpleasant. I was, too, half choked and
blinded with the dust, which hereabouts lay very
thick.</p>

<p>As I was taking my rest, I became suddenly aware
of a great noise, which was not that of the engine,
but seemed to be coming upon me at a terrible
speed. For an instant I lay paralysed, unable to
think what it was. Then, in a flash, I knew it was
the sound of the train for which we had waited so
long.</p>

<p>What would happen when it had gone by and the
barriers rose, I did not stay to think. Indeed, I do
not remember how I got to the tank, but I know
that I was fumbling with the spanner and that
the dust was falling thick into my mouth and eyes
as the train roared on its way.</p>

<p>The bottom of the tank was all encrusted with
dirt, but I had this off in a twinkling and fitted the
spanner to the plug. Twice I tried to move it, and
twice it refused to budge, for I do not think it had
ever been undone since the car was built, but had
been painted over, so that its shape was half gone
and it might not have been a plug at all, but only
a knob.</p>

<p>I had just reset the spanner, licked my hands
and taken another hold, when a sudden, unmistakable
clatter announced that the barriers were up.</p>

<p>At once I heard Mansel’s voice.</p>

<p>“Stand by, William,” he said, using my Christian
name. And then: “I’m going now,” he continued,
“to prefer my charge. From what you say I
gather you’re going to follow, so we shall meet
again.”</p>

<p>He said more, but that was as much as I heard,
for his words showed me something I had not
dreamed of, namely, that <span class="it">he did not know that I
was not still in the Rolls</span>, but thought he was free to
proceed, and—what was perhaps more serious—that
upon this important point the four in the
closed car were better informed than he.</p>

<p>With these thoughts in my mind, I put forth
all my strength, and I think any screw must have
yielded to the frantic effort I made. The drain-plug
gave way with a crack, and, after one or two
turns, I felt the petrol running over my hands.
I continued to work desperately, and, a moment
later the plug fell out of its hole, and, with a
soft gush, the spirit began to pour out into
the dust.</p>

<p>I thrust the drain-plug into my pocket, because,
without that, a hogshead of petrol would not avail
the closed car, but she would have to be towed
until she came to some place which boasted a
lathe and a man sufficiently skilled to fashion a
substitute. Then, regardless of the downpour of
petrol, I scrambled clear of the car. As I did so,
I heard Mansel raise his voice.</p>

<p>“William,” he cried, “don’t look for it any
more: we must have dropped it farther back.”</p>

<p>I knew at once that Hanbury must have told him
my errand, and that now he was giving me my
cue: so, wondering how the inmates of the closed
car would take my entrance, I stepped to the
middle of the road, and then, waving the spanner,
jogged cheerfully into view.</p>

<p>As I came alongside:</p>

<p>“Let her go,” said Mansel.</p>

<p>Hanbury had set the door open, and the car
was moving when I flung myself in. As the Rolls
swept over the metals, I heard a shout of surprise,
and this was immediately followed by a veritable
bellow of rage, which I like to think showed that
the occupants of the closed car accredited me with
some malicious attempt upon its efficiency. And
I think that in that I am right, for, instead of
pursuing, they all flung out of the car, and, when
we sailed round a bend, they were behind their
vehicle, which was standing apparently deserted,
with all four doors open, to the side of the dusty
road.</p>

<p>Then Mansel took over the wheel, and I showed
him and Hanbury the drain-plug and told my
tale. Presently we ran through a village, where
there was not so much as a forge, and a few miles
further on we came to a smooth-flowing stream.
Here Mansel gave me five minutes to strip and
bathe, and, while I did so, Hanbury unpacked
clean clothes for me to put on. When I came back
to the car, they had opened three bottles of beer
and drank my health in the most handsome fashion.
But I think it is clear that, though anyone, who
was not too fat, could have crawled underneath
the two cars, only a great personality could have
held four such villains at bay for nearly ten minutes
and so brought us safe and sound out of so perilous
a pass.</p>

<p>We came to Salzburg that night, to find the
three servants arrived and our rooms waiting: and
here Mansel slept in a bed for the first time since
he had left London, while Carson, his servant, lay
in the car in his stead.</p>

<hr />

<p>The next day we breakfasted together in
Hanbury’s room, and there, after we had eaten, a
council was held.</p>

<p>It was most probable that, if Wagensburg was
in the market, some one of the agents in Salzburg
had the castle upon his books: and, since Ellis
had taken the field, at once to set about the purchase
seemed plainly the best thing to do. Yet, to seek
to buy a property of such consequence without
having so much as seen it, was out of the question,
for not only should we be unable to judge the price
we were asked, but such an astonishing action
would be certain to arouse comment: and that
was the last thing we desired.</p>

<p>We, therefore, determined to devote the next
day to a reconnaissance, in the course of which
we should explore the country round Wagensburg,
and, if it was vacant, the property itself. We
should then, at least, be qualified to play the part
of people so much attracted by a domain as to
desire to own it, and, though an agent might think
that we had more money than brains, it was unlikely
that he would look for any deeper explanation of
our eagerness.</p>

<p>Another thing we decided was to purchase a
second car. Sooner or later we must have one, for
the Rolls would not hold six as well as baggage,
and it might well prove worse than inconvenient
to break our party in two. And, since to carry out
the reconnaissance in some car less distinctive than
the Rolls might be to our advantage, we determined
to make our purchase before we did anything else.</p>

<p>Then Mansel requested Hanbury to stay in
Salzburg, while he and I and Carson went out alone.
It was a big thing to ask, but Hanbury immediately
agreed in the most handsome way, insisting that
he would be better employed in caring for the
Rolls after her long run than in making a fourth
in what was “a three-men job.” But Mansel
made him promise not to go out alone, but always
to take with him one of the other servants, when
he left the hotel.</p>

<p>By mid-day we had a car. It was not new, but
had been carefully used, and had only come to be
sold the day before. It bore a well-known name,
was swift and very well found, and, after putting it
to several tests, Mansel drove to a Bank and paid
the price we were asked without more ado.</p>

<p>Then we ate a short luncheon, bade Hanbury
good-bye, and, taking Carson and Tester, left for
Carinthia soon after one o’clock.</p>

<p>It was a notable run. The country was
mountainous, and the scenery superb: the further
South we went the more picturesque became the
way, and the villages grew less frequent and more
and more unspoiled.</p>

<p>Everywhere there were woods and forests, high
and low, and, among them, streams and pastures
and an occasional farm, with a saucer on every
ridge-pole to keep the witches away.</p>

<p>About sundown we came to a village that Mansel
knew.</p>

<p>There was but one inn, and that did not look as
if it had much to offer, although, to judge by its
size and style, it must once have been a house of
some importance and have served people of quality.
But, as it turned out, I was never better lodged in
my life; for I slept in a great four-poster amid
furniture which must have been of great value;
my huge room was spotless: the linen was unusually
fine and smelt very sweet of some herbs, with which
it had been laid away; and the attendance was
such as, I imagine, travellers used to hope for a
hundred years ago. The fare, too, was excellent—trout,
and an omelet and most delicious bread,
with plenty of fresh fruit and cream: and, since
there was no garage or coach-house, they opened
the great doors that belonged to the house itself,
and Mansel drove the car into a vast, flagged hall,
to the great entertainment of the regular customers
of the inn, who were there gathered drinking,
before they went to their beds.</p>

<p>We were on the road the next morning by six
o’clock, and before it was seven we had sighted
Wagensburg.</p>

<p>We had stopped for a moment by the way to
study the map, and I was trying to determine
exactly which road we were using, when Mansel
gave a light laugh and touched me upon the arm.</p>

<p>I followed his gaze.</p>

<p>He was looking up over his shoulder at a range of
high woods which fell sharply to a river. At one
point a bend of the river bit into the line of the
woods, and above the bend rose a cliff, some hundred
and fifty feet high. And on the edge of the cliff
stood a castle wall.</p>

<p>Neither of us said anything; but, after a little,
Mansel started the engine and I put away the map.</p>

<p>Three miles farther on we came to the village
of Lerai, where was a bridge. We stopped at the
inn there and ordered breakfast, and, while this
was being prepared, Mansel talked with the host.</p>

<p>All that we wanted to know, the latter told him.
Wagensburg was to be sold: the village postmaster
held the keys of the house: no one had
viewed the property since it had been for sale.
And, when Mansel said he should like to see the
castle, the innkeeper called for his hat and set
out to find the postmaster and ask for the keys.</p>

<p>When Mansel told me all this—for I cannot
speak German, and had understood next to nothing
of what had been said—I could have thrown up
my hat; and even he was very plainly elated to
think that, except for Ellis, our way was so easy
and clear. The breakfast was served, but I could
hardly swallow for sheer excitement, so that Mansel
advised me to think upon fishing and trout-streams,
“because,” said he, gravely, “such contemplation
is not only very restful, but very much in point,
for, remember, it is trout that has brought us to
these parts, and, if we like Wagensburg, we do so
because it will make an agreeable fishing-lodge.”</p>

<p>Since Mansel never spoke without reason, I
strove to do as he said, but I fear my reflections
upon angling were incoherent and of no value,
for fish are not found in wells, nor do ropes and
lanterns form part of an angler’s kit. Before,
however, the landlord was back with the keys,
Mansel had me in hand, and when the former
reappeared, I was listening to such a discourse
upon flies as must, I think, have interested the
most unlikely fisherman that ever was born. To
round the picture, the host was brought into the
session and made free of Mansel’s words, to which,
since he was something of an angler, he responded
so warmly that I began to think that we should
never start, or that, at any rate, Ellis or one of
his confederates would first appear.</p>

<p>However, at last we left, with the landlord
sitting with Carson in the back of the car.</p>

<p>We crossed the bridge, and, almost immediately
leaving the main road, turned to the right up a
narrower, rougher way, which, it presently appeared,
led only to Wagensburg. For a while the road
ran by the river: then it climbed up gradually
into the woods and finally lay like a shelf cut out
of the side of the forest above the water and tilted
up like a ramp to the castle itself. To this there
was no gateway, but the road ran right on to the
terrace, the wall of which we had seen from the
other side. The house was long and low, and
stood upon two sides of a pleasant courtyard, to
which, upon its third side, the terrace made an
apron, with a row of sweet-smelling limes standing
between the two. Upon the fourth side stood the
stables and the chapel, with a mighty gateway
between: through this gateway the road we had
used went on, leading, so far as I could see, to woods
and hanging pastures, and made, undoubtedly, to
serve the estate. There were trees in the courtyard,
and, a little to one side, by the house, an
old parapeted well.</p>

<p>The sun was shining full on the terrace, and
Mansel drove into the courtyard and stopped in
the shade.</p>

<p>Then we alighted, and the landlord took us over
the house.</p>

<p>This was agreeable, and full of fine, big rooms;
but there was no running water, and a lot would
have had to be done to turn the mansion into a
comfortable home.</p>

<p>Mansel, however, seemed well pleased with all
that he saw and took good stock of everything,
counting up the bedrooms, stepping the salons,
and snuffing the air for damp, as though he seriously
contemplated taking up residence there for good
and all.</p>

<p>At last he turned to the landlord.</p>

<p>“And now about water,” he said. “That’s so
often the stumbling-block with these castles up in
the hills.”</p>

<p>At once the landlord insisted that the supply
was superb. No castle in all Carinthia, he declared,
was better furnished with water.</p>

<p>“Good,” said Mansel, “I’m glad to hear it,
because, as a rule, with a well so close to a cliff——”</p>

<p>Here the host interrupted to say that the well
in the courtyard was little worth. That, he
explained, was the original well: but, as Mansel
had surmised, it was dug too close to the cliff, and
its gift was meagre and uncertain. <span class="it">Years ago
another well had been dug in the meadows beyond the
gateway, a well of great size and depth, the springs of
which had never been known to fail, which was so
much of a wonder that it was more famous than the
castle itself, and was still known thereabouts as
The Great Well of Wagensburg.</span></p>

<p>“Well, that’s all right,” said Mansel. “I suppose
the water’s good.”</p>

<p>“The water is excellent, sir, and clear as crystal.”</p>

<p>“When was it last cleaned out?”</p>

<p>The landlord threw up his hands.</p>

<p>“Clean out The Great Well of Wagensburg!
Why, sir, it is bottomless. I do not suppose it
could be done. But the water is perfect: that I
will guarantee.”</p>

<p>Mansel frowned and put his head on one side.</p>

<p>“All wells should be cleaned from time to time.
Never mind. Where does it lie?”</p>

<p>We followed the landlord out of the courtyard,
past the chapel and stables and into a wood. Two
minutes later we turned into a fair meadow that
sloped gently to another wood upon the opposite
side. And in the midst of the meadow lay the
great well.</p>

<p>When we came near, it was clear that it merited
its name.</p>

<p>Twelve feet across it was, with a broad stone
parapet about it and a turret-shaped roof above.</p>

<p>Four pillars were supporting the roof, and two
of these held the windlass, which was a massive
business, laden with a quantity of chain. Bucket
there was none, but an empty hook was dangling
over the depths.</p>

<p>When he saw there was no bucket, the landlord’s
face fell; but, after a moment, he said that no
doubt it had been put in the stables against being
carried off, and, begging us to await his return,
started back the way we had come.</p>

<p>While he was gone we walked to the farther
wood and gradually round the meadow, which we
found was something of a plateau, for the ground
fell away on three sides and only rose on one, that
is to say on the side of the farther wood: here it
soon rose very sharply into a peak, which commanded
a view of the castle and some of the path
we had come, as well as for some distance the two
approaches to the meadow on which there was
no wood.</p>

<p>Whilst we were looking about us, we perceived
the landlord returning, bucket in hand, and, when
we got back to the well, he and Carson were lowering
it into the depths.</p>

<p>The water came up clear and clean and cold, to
the great glee of the landlord, who seemed by that
circumstance to consider his protests proved,
although there was nothing to show how much
there was in the well, or whether the water itself
was fit to drink. Mansel, however, appeared
satisfied, and, after some further discussion, we
made our way back to the castle by the path through
the wood.</p>

<p>Thence we drove back to Lerai; and presently,
having rewarded the innkeeper and declared that,
if we bought Wagensburg, he should be our agent
for obtaining supplies, left, as was only to be
expected, amid a perfect flurry of ‘nods and
becks and wreathed smiles.’</p>

<p>As we drove out of the village:</p>

<p>“The art of life,” said Mansel, “is to make
valuable friends.”</p>

<p>For the next three hours we proved the country
round about, identifying castles and villages and,
thanks to the power of the car, covering a great
deal of ground. Then at last we turned North
and ran into Salzburg that night at eleven o’clock.</p>

<p>Hanbury was glad to see us, and was naturally
agog to hear our tale, but he had no news beyond
that he had found the offices of the principal house-agents
and thought he had seen Ellis at the door
of our hotel.</p>

<p>Herein he was right.</p>

<p>When Mansel visited a house-agent on the
following day and, after inquiries, announced that
he was disposed to purchase Wagensburg, the
agent opened his eyes.</p>

<p>“Sir,” he said, “you are a few hours too late.
Wagensburg is not sold, but it is not for sale. By a
curious coincidence I granted an option to purchase
this very property yesterday afternoon.”</p>

<div><span class="pageno" title="73" id="Page_73"></span><h1>CHAP. III       THE BATTLE WITH THE SPRINGS</h1></div>

<p class="noindent"><span class="lead-in">When,</span> ten minutes later, Mansel sat down on a
bench and told us that we were forestalled, Hanbury
and I stared at each other in dismay.</p>

<p>Before we could speak, Mansel proceeded to take
the whole of the blame.</p>

<p>“I chose the wrong evil,” he said. “We had
six hours’ start of Ellis, and I threw it away. I
thought I was fighting a battle when I was running
a race. And that was a bad mistake. And now
we’ve all three got to think. Ellis has got the
wheel, with the Law behind him: we’ve got the
chart. The very least he expects is a compromise.”</p>

<p>“Never,” said I.</p>

<p>“I agree,” said Mansel, “for every reason.
And that’s why we’ve got to think how to get
the wheel.”</p>

<p>He rose then, and, promising to return in half
an hour, sauntered away with Tester at his heels.</p>

<p>Hanbury and I sat still in the bright sunshine,
saying little, but racking our brains for some way
out of the pass.</p>

<p>To me it seemed to be surely a case of stalemate,
a position which could only be relieved by our
withdrawal from the field. If we had plainly retired,
Ellis would hesitate to purchase, for to expend two
or three thousand pounds on preventing another
from taking what you would like to enjoy is the
investment of a Crœsus, and, though there was a
chance that his purchase would suggest to us the
wisdom of coming to terms, to stake so much money
so blindly would be unwarrantable. And I think
that Hanbury thought the same, for beyond insisting
that Mansel had made no mistake, to which I
heartily agreed, he only remarked that the race
was seldom to the swift, and that he was glad to
have seen Salzburg.</p>

<p>The half-hour had not expired before Mansel came
back, and, after glancing at his watch, sat down on
the bench between us and asked me once again
to describe Ellis.</p>

<p>I did so carefully.</p>

<p>“That was the fellow I saw,” said Hanbury.</p>

<p>“Very well,” said Mansel. “Now, listen. A
week ago in London we dined at the Carlton Grill.
There and then we agreed to buy Wagensburg, if
the place was for sale. At the table next to us
was seated a coarse-looking man, who seemed more
than once to be listening to what we said. All of
us noticed this, but, after we left the grill-room, we
thought no more of the matter and went our ways.
Yesterday we saw him again in the streets of
Salzburg, and it occurs to us that he is the man
who holds an option to purchase Wagensburg. If
we are right, it is clear that he is no genuine
purchaser, but an unprincipled villain, who is merely
seeking to enrich himself <span class="it">at the vendor’s expense</span>.”
With that he rose to his feet and knocked out his
pipe. “And now, we’ll go back to the house-agent.
We’re all very angry, you know: but if I seem too
much annoyed, you can try to calm me down.”</p>

<p>What followed I shall never forget.</p>

<p>By the time we arrived at the office, Mansel was
seemingly beside himself with rage, and, when we
were presently admitted to the agent’s room, he
began to storm and rave like any madman. At
first, such was his incoherence, that the agent was
frightened to death, but, so soon as he gathered that
Mansel was not angry with him, but with some
common enemy, he became greatly excited, and,
apparently catching the frenzy which possessed
Mansel, demanded with howls of fury to be informed
of the truth. This he was so long denied that I
thought he would have lost his reason, for Mansel,
while withholding the facts, never ceased to recite
the most horrid and galling conclusions, and the
unfortunate agent was actually squinting with
emotion when Mansel had mercy upon him and
told him his tale.</p>

<p>To judge from its effect, he told it very well, for,
long before he had finished, the agent’s eyes were
burning with wrath and indignation, and, when
Mansel said he would wager that Ellis had never
set foot in Carinthia, much less laid eyes upon
Wagensburg, the other screeched that it was true,
and that, when he had opened and shown him his
book of photographs of properties for sale, Ellis
had actually studied the opposite page. That
Mansel would not have committed such an error
was very obvious, for he had spoken throughout
as though he knew Carinthia as well as the palm of
his hand, and had constantly referred to castles
and villages by name and to Wagensburg itself
with a skilful familiarity which would have deceived
a Judge. Indeed, all things considered, it was not
at all surprising that the agent was swept off his
feet and, snatching up a copy of the letter he had
yesterday sent to Ellis, thrust it into Mansel’s hands
and demanded brokenly to be told what he should do.</p>

<p>The letter acknowledged the receipt of five
pounds, and stated that, by virtue of having paid
that sum, Ellis had secured the sole right to purchase
Wagensburg for two thousand five hundred pounds,
and that this right would endure for one calendar
month.</p>

<p>“Lease me the property to-day,” said Mansel,
laying the letter down, “for fifty years at a rent of
five pounds a year: in return, I’ll undertake, if
Ellis doesn’t exercise his option—and when he
hears of the lease I don’t believe he will—to purchase
Wagensburg forthwith for three thousand pounds.”</p>

<p>For a moment the agent stared, then he began
to laugh like a maniac; and Mansel with him.</p>

<p>The two laughed till they cried, as did Hanbury
and I, for, though we did not understand what was
the joke, unmoved to witness such paroxysms of
mirth was beyond our power.</p>

<p>At last:</p>

<p>“Prepare the papers,” said Mansel, sinking into
a chair and taking out bank-notes. “I’ll give you
three hundred pounds as an earnest of the purchase
price, to be returned to me if Ellis goes on.”</p>

<p>With that, he turned to Hanbury and me and
told us what he had arranged, while the agent ran
into an adjoining room and began to give instructions
to one of his clerks. Very soon we heard a
typewriter in action and within half an hour the
two Agreements had been signed. Then Mansel
wrote the agent a cheque for twenty-five pounds
and said that that was compensation for the trouble
and annoyance he had caused by discussing his
private affairs in a public place: and so we parted,
full of goodwill and understanding, which were
immensely enhanced by the knowledge that we
had undone a common enemy.</p>

<p>At six o’clock the next morning we left for Lerai,
servants and baggage and all, in the two cars. We
spent the night at the inn, and the next day, in
compliance with instructions from Salzburg, the
postmaster brought us the keys of Wagensburg.</p>

<p>Be sure we had taken possession within the hour.</p>

<hr />

<p>To pick our quarters was plainly the first thing
to do, and, after a short consideration, we decided
to use the kitchen and servants’ hall. These were
both spacious, and looked not into the courtyard,
but on to the woods and meadows towards the
great well. They were served by a decent hall,
with a house door at either end, and a passage led
into the stables by way of a harness-room. All
this was very convenient. As well as possessing a
certain privacy, the rooms were easy of access and
could be approached directly from either side of
the mansion: once within the stables, the cars
would be under our hand; and, whether they were
in the kitchen or in the harness-room, where it
was arranged they should sleep, our servants would
never be more than a few steps away.</p>

<p>So soon as the decision was taken, that part of
the house was opened, the stable doors were set
wide and the servants fell to cleaning our quarters
as hard as they could “for,” said Mansel, “once
we’re dug in, we’ve little or nothing to fear: but
come on a man whose house is out of order, and
you’ve an ally in his camp who is worth as much
as yourself.”</p>

<p>Then he gave me a map and binocular, and asked
me to stay on the terrace as sentinel, desiring me
to locate what roads I could see and, when I had
done that, to take Tester and prove the ground
towards Lerai and see if there was a spot conveniently
near from which the village and the
bridge could be observed.</p>

<p>Then he and Hanbury began to unload the
cars, unpacking the stores which we had bought at
Salzburg and disclosing a quantity of stuff which
we had brought from England, prominent among
which were some electrical apparatus and a great
deal of wire.</p>

<p>I saw no more, for I had my work to do, but,
when I came back with my report—which was
negative, for I could discover no point at all
reasonably near from which the village could be
viewed—two of the servants were washing the
empty cars, the kitchen fire was burning, the hall
was full of gear, orderly arranged, a table was set
for luncheon under a tree, and the band of a well-known
London restaurant was making us free of a
selection from <span class="it">La Bohême</span>.</p>

<p>When our meal was over, we sat and smoked on
the terrace, while the servants were eating theirs,
and then, for the first time, I began to appreciate
the full charm of our surroundings.</p>

<p>The grandeur of the landscape which the terrace
was commanding, as no royal box ever commanded
a stage, the dignity of the pleasance upon which
we sat, and the high woods all about us, made our
present life seem like a handsome dream: and the
silence, the sunlight and the sweet air showed me a
side of Nature such as I never expect to see anywhere
else.</p>

<p>My musing, however, was soon ended, for Mansel
asked me to point out the roads I had managed to
identify, and, though these were few, before he
and Hanbury had imbibed what information I had,
the servants had finished eating and Carson and
Bell had returned to their work on the cars.</p>

<p>We then went to work with the wire which Mansel
had brought, and, after two hours, had laid an
invisible trap across the road of approach, and
clean around the castle as far as the garden door
which we were to use. This we connected to a
battery, and then to a bell which hung in the kitchen
hall, and, after a little adjustment, to our great
content the arrangement worked very well, for
the slightest pressure at any point was instantly
reported. Then we laid a wire between the stables
and the kitchen, and another from the kitchen to
the great well, and so established a means of communication
which might at any moment prove of
great value. When this had been done, we turned
our attention to installing electric light, and before
sundown our quarters were adequately illumined,
and the search-light which belonged to the Rolls
was able, at our will, to reveal the depths of the
well, as I will warrant they had never been revealed
before. Then supper was served, and Mansel drew
up some orders for the following day. These will
sufficiently appear, but he wrote out some general
orders which stayed pinned up in the hall, and, so
far as I can remember, this was how they ran.</p>

<div class="blockquote">

<p class="hang">(1) <span class="it">Reveille at 4 a.m.</span><br />
<span class="it">Breakfast at 7 a.m.</span><br />
<span class="it">Supper one hour after sundown.</span></p>

<p class="hang">(2) <span class="it">No light of any kind which can be seen from the courtyard
will be shown even for an instant.</span></p>

<p class="hang">(3) <span class="it">Accumulators will be charged, if necessary, from 4.15 a.m.
and, in any event, each engine will be started and run for
five minutes from that hour.</span></p>

<p class="hang">(4) <span class="it">So long as any sign of occupation can be seen from the
courtyard, the road of approach will be watched.</span></p>

<p class="hang">(5) <span class="it">The alarum tape, wires and bells will be tested at reveille,
dinner-time and sundown.</span></p>

<p class="hang">(6) <span class="it">In addition to their other duties: Carson will take sole
charge of the cars and the electrical apparatus. Rowley will
act as quarter-master and cook. Bell will clean the quarters
and maintain the water supply.</span></p>

<p class="hang">(7) <span class="it">No one will leave the castle without acquainting me.</span></p>

<p class="hang">(8) <span class="it">The first sign of any approach will be immediately signalled.</span></p>

<p class="hang">(9) <span class="it">There will always be someone in the kitchen if there is
no one on guard.</span></p>

</div>

<p>I can remember no more, but these rules show that
Mansel did all that he could to guard against
surprise and to insure that our work should go
forward with the least embarrassment.</p>

<p>For all that, we were none too well placed. To
gain the curtilage of the castle, without being
observed, was singularly easy, and the well was two
hundred yards from the garden door, so that
anyone at all curious and prudent could watch our
labour by the hour, and any sudden, determined
aggression by three or four armed men would be
difficult to counter.</p>

<p>We sat on the terrace for a while before going
to bed, and heard some music from London, and
at length the news, and, but for Mansel, Hanbury
and I, I think, would have sat there most of the
night, for a full moon was shining out of an empty
sky and the prospect which the terrace commanded
seemed more lovely than ever.</p>

<p>We were up and abroad the next morning before
it was light, and, as soon as the alarums had been
tested, repaired to the well.</p>

<p>Mansel had all ready a measuring-line. This
was a very fine cord knotted at every inch and
tagged at each foot, and at each end was fastened
a lump of lead. The use of this proved that what
the well-digger had said of its capacity was substantially
correct, for the well was two-thirds full of
water, and its depth was ninety-six feet. Allowing
for the facts that the man would have spoken of
metres, and not of feet, and that in so many years a
deposit had surely been formed at the bottom of
the well, we had no reason to suppose that his
actual figures were not as good as ours. Sixty-two
feet of water lay in the well.</p>

<p>I have already said that the well was twelve feet
across, and, after a moment’s calculation, Hanbury
drew in his breath.</p>

<p>“That chamber is sealed,” he said, “faster, I
fancy, than even the well-digger dreamed. If we
had a pump——”</p>

<p>“We should be no better off,” said Mansel.
“A pump can push water, but to pull it up from a
depth is beyond its power. If we installed a plant
to supply the house, to make sure of water we
should have to sink the pump; and no pump that
ever was made could empty this well. Whether
we can do it by bucket I can’t possibly tell, but
I’m told that the last six months have been unusually
dry, and so, if we go all out, I think we may be able
to beat the springs.”</p>

<p>Hanbury examined the cupola which sheltered
the well.</p>

<p>“We have two pulleys,” he said. “If we put a
beam across and above the windlass, we can use
two buckets together and, with the windlass, three.”</p>

<p>“That’s right,” said Mansel. “And now here’s
another point. We must make a gutter to take
the water away. If we don’t do that it’ll find
its way back to the well.”</p>

<p>Then he picked up a stirrup and, looping the
leather on to the hook which was dangling over
the well, asked me if I would go down and see what
I could.</p>

<p>I was only too ready to comply, but before I
descended he made me put on a warm coat against
the chill, and fastened about me a length of fine
wire rope. I then set my foot in the stirrup and
gripped the chain, and, Hanbury working the
windlass and Mansel paying out the rope, I passed
down into the well.</p>

<p>When I was close to the water, I bade them stop,
and, when they had made all fast, they let down the
search-light.</p>

<p>The well was beautifully built, and I do not
believe such masonry is often rendered to-day.
The stones had been finely cut, and, though no
doubt they were cemented together, they were
fitted so closely that the cement did not appear.
There were no bars at all, nor any foot or handhold
that I could see, but presently I discovered a
series of niches regularly cut in the wall, one above
the other and about two feet apart. They were
scarce an inch deep, and I could not believe that
there was any man, living or dead, daring or skilful
enough to rise or descend by this means.
Happening, however, to look round, I perceived
another series, exactly corresponding, a quarter of
the way round the well. These were more deeply
cut; and it immediately occurred to me that these
niches had supported one beam of a wooden stage
on which the men had stood whilst building the
wall. Sure enough, on the opposite side were the
niches for the other beam, one twice as deep as
the other: so that, given four clean-cut beams,
the men who were working could have raised their
stage as they pleased, without any help, two feet
at a time. One or two pieces of wood were rotting
on the surface of the water, and, here and there,
little ferns were growing apparently out of the
wall, but, otherwise, except that the sides were
weather-stained, the well, so far as I could see, was
as sound as a bell, and might have only been finished
the week before. I could not see the spring working,
although I peered very hard, and, since the surface
of the water seemed to be motionless, I came to
the conclusion that such water as we had drawn
had been replaced in the night, and that, having
filled this pool to the brim, the little underground
stream had resumed its course. And here I soon
saw I was right, for there was no watermark above
the surface, and the well was plainly full.</p>

<p>All this information I cried to Mansel and
Hanbury, and both were greatly delighted at the
fine condition of the well; but, as I hung there,
seemingly so far beneath them, the magnitude of
our task appalled me, and I felt that the silent
guardian of the leather bags was to prove a more
formidable enemy than Ellis himself.</p>

<p>Then they pulled me up, and the atmosphere
seemed sultry after the chill of the well.</p>

<p>Then we went back to the stables, where was
some sawn wood, and before it was time for breakfast
we had fixed a beam upon the free pillars
immediately under the dome, and had lashed a
pulley into place upon either side. Whilst we were
doing this, Carson and Bell were bringing up planks,
of which we had found quite a store, for with these
we meant to make a gutter, in the shape of an
endless trough, to conduct the water away. By the
time we had settled upon the line this should take,
it was seven o’clock, so we left the business there
and returned to the house.</p>

<p>At breakfast we came to a decision of some
importance. This was, plainly, that we should not
attempt to conceal our endeavours to empty the
well. It was, therefore, arranged that Mansel
should drive to Lerai, as soon as he had bathed,
and acquaint the landlord of the inn with our
intention. He proposed to display great annoyance
at being saddled at the outset with such a labour,
and, on being asked the reason for our resolve, to
say that last night we had drawn up the remains
of a baby, which meant, of course, that the whole of
the water was foul. He would then procure ropes and
buckets and other implements, and even give out
that, if after one or two days we needed assistance,
he should desire the landlord to find us some
men.</p>

<p>So he and Carson left at half past eight, taking
the Rolls, whilst Hanbury and I returned at once
to the meadow to set to work upon the troughs.
With nails and hammer these were easy to make,
and, as soon as Bell appeared, we gave him a pick
and shovel, and set him to cutting the groove in
which our gutter should lie.</p>

<p>Within the hour the bell by the well told us of
Mansel’s return, and five minutes later we saw him
appear in the meadow and come towards us.</p>

<p>“Did that bell ring?” he said shortly.</p>

<p>“Yes,” said Hanbury.</p>

<p>“Then, if you please,” said Mansel, “never
disregard it again.”</p>

<p>And there he left it, for, as I have said, he was a
man of few words: but there was that in his voice
which there was no mistaking, and Hanbury and I
felt as guilty and ashamed as though by some
folly we had ruined our enterprise.</p>

<p>Then he told us that his tale had been well
received, and that the landlord seemed genuinely
distressed at our predicament, “for such,” said
Mansel, “he plainly regards it: and when I said
that we must empty the well, he threw up his hands.
However, when I said that, unless the well could
be cleaned, I should give up the place, he sent for
buckets and ropes, and promised to come up this
evening to see what help he could give. I then
sent a wire to Maple’s, telling them not to dispatch
my furniture: I fear it may puzzle them, but it
supported my case and cleared the air.”</p>

<p>Here Carson appeared with a bucket as big as a
bath: indeed, two men could not have carried it
full, but it was made, I imagine, to receive refuse
or to hold a store of water upon which a cook could
draw. And I must frankly confess that it did my
heart good to see it, for I felt that, if we had a
giant’s task before us, it was something, at any rate,
to have a giant’s tools to use.</p>

<p>By the time we had finished the gutter, which
led down out of the meadow into a kind of combe,
it was nearly eleven o’clock, and we sat down and
drank some beer which Carson had brought.</p>

<p>Then Bell was sent to the kitchen, and Rowley
came up in his stead; Mansel went up to the point
in the farther wood, from which, as I have said, a
man could observe some of the neighbouring
ground; and Carson and Rowley took one rope,
and Hanbury and I the other.</p>

<p>The work was hard to the point of severity, but
the sight of so much water coming up out of the
well was fuel to our endeavours, and we worked for
twenty minutes without a break. Long before this
Mansel had come to our assistance, for to land the
buckets, when full, needed another man, and, lame
as he was, he performed this awkward task as he
did most things, that is to say, as though he had
practised it all his life.</p>

<p>When we stopped for luncheon, we had taken
eight feet of water out of the well.</p>

<p>When luncheon was over, we sat on the terrace
for a little, under the shade of the limes.</p>

<p>Hanbury was asleep, Mansel was reading <span class="it">Lockhart’s
Life of Scott</span>—without which work, he said,
he never travelled, because it was the best host a
man’s mind could have—and I was lazily regarding
the opposing country, when I noticed a patch of
haze a great way off. I had hardly remarked it
before it disappeared, and it came to me in a flash
that it must have been dust. At once I rose and
took the binocular, and, since I knew precisely where
to look for the road, I was in time to see a closed
car flash into and out of view on its journey South.</p>

<p>When I told Mansel, he nodded and said he was
glad.</p>

<p>“It’s high time,” said he. “If they hadn’t
appeared to-day, I should have been uneasy. I
like the other side to do the obvious thing.”</p>

<p>With that he put up his volume, and, asking me
to tell him when the car reached the spot from which
we had first seen Wagensburg, rose to his feet and
began to pace the courtyard, with his hands behind
his back and his head in the air.</p>

<p>Presently the closed car appeared beyond the
river, and when I reported this, Mansel called the
servants, and I roused Hanbury and told him what
was afoot.</p>

<p>Then Mansel spoke to us all.</p>

<p>“We’re going to be visited,” he said, “by five very
angry men. I think there’ll be five, and I’m sure
they’ll be angry. This is a good place to receive
them for several reasons. I think perhaps I’d better
play host, but I shall want some support. Mr.
Hanbury will take the gateway, and Mr. Chandos
the road: Carson will take that window, and
Rowley that: and Bell will occupy the loft. Please
be ready, but nobody show himself until you hear
me say ‘NOW.’ And whatever happens, don’t
fire. I believe in baring the teeth, but to use
them, except to bite back, would be very
foolish.”</p>

<p>Then the stable doors were opened, the Rolls
was brought out, and out of her we were armed—the
servants with sporting rifles, and Mansel,
Hanbury and I with a pistol apiece.</p>

<p>The servants had been through the War, and
took this quietly enough, but I never was so much
excited in all my life, and pictures of blood-lettings
and feats of arms rose up before me like so many
common rooms of which I had been made free.</p>

<p>Then the car was returned to the stables, and the
servants went to their posts, while Mansel showed
Hanbury and me how a pistol should be handled,
and that the safety-catch was the stile between
life and death. After that, Mansel took Tester
and shut him up in the house, and, when he came
back, we sat down on the wall of the well, by
the side of the house, until we should hear
the car.</p>

<p>While we were there, Mansel inquired if there
was any one line which we thought he should take
in dealing with Ellis and his friends, “because,”
said he, “beyond recommending them to return
to the deuce, I’ve no plan at all. I don’t propose
to deny that we’re looking for treasure, and I propose
to announce that we’re cleaning the well. If you
can’t conceal, advertise: it’s the next best thing.
But I’ve little else in my mind, except that this
courtyard is as much as they’re going to see.”</p>

<p>Hanbury and I had no suggestion to offer, if
for no other reason, because to think at all clearly
was beyond our power. This mean state of mind,
I am sure, was due to our expectation of what was
to come, and, since this failing is one which I have
never cured, I have the more reverence for Mansel
who, I think, could await the Powers of Darkness
themselves without turning a hair.</p>

<p>Presently we heard the drone of a car climbing
into the woods, and Hanbury and I passed out of
the great gateway and sat down behind the chapel
where we could not be seen.</p>

<p>As I afterwards found, the car contained five
men, all of whom alighted, three only of whom
spoke. These three were Ellis, the man whom I
had knocked down, and the other who had answered
Mansel at the level-crossing. The last was
addressed by his companions as “Rose”—Mansel
told us later that he was undoubtedly ‘Rose’
Noble, a man of some position among thieves—and
my friend was called “Punter,” though whether
that was a nickname I cannot say.</p>

<p>The car came to rest on the terrace, and we heard
them alight, but for a moment or two they spoke
between themselves, as though they had not seen
Mansel, and believed the courtyard empty.</p>

<p>Then:</p>

<p>“Can I help you?” said Mansel.</p>

<p>When Ellis replied, his voice was shaking, and
his speech thick with wrath.</p>

<p>“Yes,” he said, “you can. You can pop along
off my land. That’ll save me the trouble of putting
you out.”</p>

<p>“Oh, are you my landlord?” said Mansel.
“Because, if you are, you can help me to clean out
your well. It seems to have been used as a cemetery,
and I didn’t come here to get typhoid.”</p>

<p>Ellis began to rave, but ‘Rose’ Noble put him
aside.</p>

<p>“What’s this wash about landlords?”</p>

<p>“It’s very simple,” said Mansel, stifling a yawn.
“If he owns this estate, he’s my landlord. If he
doesn’t, he isn’t. So in any event the question of
putting me out will not arise. But I tell you
frankly I’m fed up about this well. Supposing——”</p>

<p>“Cut it out,” said ‘Rose’ Noble. “Ellis
here’s got you down. This place was for sale,
and he’s bought it.”</p>

<p>“And I hold a fifty years’ lease,” said Mansel.
“If he wasn’t told, he should have been. But
perhaps they thought if he knew he wouldn’t buy.
And now about this well. When I took the place
I was given to understand——”</p>

<p>“You’re a great believer in bluff,” said ‘Rose’
Noble.</p>

<p>“You don’t believe me?” said Mansel. “Well,
that’s as you please. But if I’m not here of right,
why did they give me the keys?”</p>

<p>There was a moment’s silence.</p>

<p>Then:</p>

<p>“Lease be damned,” roared Ellis. “I’ve bought
the —— place.”</p>

<p>“That gives you,” said Mansel, “no shadow of
right to be here. Unless I’m behind with my
rent, you can’t set a foot on this land—for fifty
years.”</p>

<p>At this there was a great uproar, and I slipped
into the road and up as close as I dared, to see
that all was well.</p>

<p>‘Rose’ Noble and Punter were holding back
Ellis, while Mansel was sitting still upon the rim
of the well, with one leg cocked over the other, and
a pipe in his mouth.</p>

<p>Presently the storm abated, and Ellis suffered
Punter to lead him away to the car, on the
step of which he sat down and mopped his face,
while ‘Rose’ Noble continued to play the hand.</p>

<p>“Leases and what-not,” he said, “don’t cut
much ice with me. The Law’s well enough in its
place, but I guess we can do without it this afternoon.”</p>

<p>“If you mean,” said Mansel, “that you want
to stay here and talk, I won’t ask you to withdraw
for a quarter of an hour.”</p>

<p>“That,” said ‘Rose’ Noble quietly, “is exactly
what I meant.”</p>

<p>With that, he took out a cigar and leaned his
back against a tree.</p>

<p>“Do you seriously think,” he said, “that we’re
going to sit right down and let you lift that treasure
under our eyes?”</p>

<p>“Not for one moment,” said Mansel cheerfully.</p>

<p>“Then,” said ‘Rose’ Noble, “why don’t you
face the facts? We’re five to one and two boys:
this isn’t exactly Holborn: and we’re not afraid
to strike.”</p>

<p>“I know Ellis isn’t,” said Mansel.</p>

<p>At that Ellis started up with a volley of oaths,
but ‘Rose’ Noble cursed him into silence, and
returned to the charge.</p>

<p>“You know where that treasure is?”</p>

<p>“I do and I don’t,” said Mansel. “To be
perfectly frank, I was going to start looking to-day,
but this infernal well has upset my plans. You
must have water, you know.”</p>

<p>“Quit that line,” said the other sharply. “And
tell me—what do you know?”</p>

<p>“Yes, I see the fire-arm,” said Mansel. “But
it doesn’t faze me. Unless I misjudge you, you’re
not going to make the mistake which was made
not far from Chartres three weeks ago.”</p>

<p>Ellis lea«»pt to his feet.</p>

<p>“How long are we going to stand this?” he
cried. “Put it across the —— once for all.
Shove the cards on the table. I’m sick of being
chewed.”</p>

<p>‘Rose’ Noble disregarded him.</p>

<p>“You drew on me,” he said quietly, “by the
side of the railway line. You made a hole in my
car.”</p>

<p>“Two,” said Mansel. “Two holes, counting
the petrol-tank.”</p>

<p>The other lighted his cigar.</p>

<p>“Two holes,” he said slowly. “And Punter
was knocked down. And in spite of all that, I’m
going to give you your choice.” He threw away
the match and folded his arms. “Give us your
map or plan or note or whatever it is: give up
possession quietly: give me your word to keep out
of Austria for the next six months, and I’ll let the
three of you go.”</p>

<p>“I see,” said Mansel. “What’s the alternative?”</p>

<p>“We take possession,” said ‘Rose’ Noble, “here
and now: you will stay <span class="it">as our guests</span> until the
treasure is found. How long that period will be
will depend upon <span class="it">your ability to withstand the
inclination to drink</span>. When it has been found, and
we are gone, your future will depend upon how
long it is before somebody passes this way.”</p>

<p>I never heard words uttered in a tone so cold
and merciless, and Ellis appeared almost genial
beside this sinister man.</p>

<p>He was a big, hook-nosed fellow with sandy hair.
His face was grey and flabby, and he was very fat.
He had a curious way of hooding his eyes, but
when he drew back his lids—and this was seldom—you
seemed to be looking upon two coals of
fire, that were consumed with hatred of everything
they saw.</p>

<p>When he had spoken, there was a little silence.</p>

<p>Then:</p>

<p>“That’s the stuff,” said Punter, with half a
laugh.</p>

<p>“You think so?” said Mansel swiftly. “Well,
we shall see.” He rose. “And now I’m going to
be less generous than you. I’m going to give you
no choice—except to withdraw. I’m not going to
look for that treasure while you sit and watch me
do it. I’m in no hurry: in fact, I’ve time to
burn. I’ve taken a lease of this place for fifty
years; the fishing round about here is such as I
love, and at the present moment, though it doesn’t
seem to interest you, I’ve got my hands full with
this well. But don’t think, from what I say, that
you’re free of these grounds. I’ve a right to order
you off, and I’m going to do it <span class="it">right NOW</span>. If
after this, you return, you’ll return as trespassers,
and you can take it from me that, so far as this
estate is concerned, <span class="it">trespassers will be shot</span>.”</p>

<p>With that, he looked round the courtyard, and,
seeing, I suppose, something in his movement
which they did not understand, the five men followed
his gaze.</p>

<p>Asprawl in the mouth of the loft, Bell was covering
‘Rose’ Noble: each of the two open windows
was framing a rifle-barrel, with a head and shoulders
behind: and Hanbury stood in the gateway, and
I was in the mouth of the road.</p>

<p>There was a long silence.</p>

<p>At length:</p>

<p>“That’s two tricks to you,” said ‘Rose’ Noble,
rubbing his nose. “But I don’t think you’ll get
any more. An ace and a King look pretty, but
they only take one trick each, and I’d rather hold
the rest of the suit.”</p>

<p>“Are you quite sure you do?” said Mansel.</p>

<p>“Yes,” said ‘Rose’ Noble, “and let me tell
you this. Before the game’s over you’ll remember
this afternoon . . . and the sunshine . . . and the
air . . . and the pretty, bright blue sky . . . And
when you remember them, you’ll curse the ——
that bore you, and——”</p>

<p>Mansel had knocked him down, and, pistol in
hand, was flat against the trunk of the lime-tree
against which ‘Rose’ Noble had lately been
leaning, before a man could cry out or a shot could
be fired. I have never seen any movements so
swiftly made; indeed, looking back at the episode,
I cannot honestly say that I remember it in detail,
for, though I was looking on, the matter was over
before I knew it had begun, and I think that the
wits of all present were similarly outrun, for an
age seemed to elapse before Ellis started forward
with a yell, and a hand to his hip.</p>

<p>“Don’t be a fool,” said Mansel, looking along his
barrel into Ellis’ eyes. And then: “Put up
your hands.”</p>

<p>I thought the fellow would have fallen down in a
fit, for all the blood in his body seemed to go into
his face, which grew more black then red, and he
put a hand to his throat as though he were choking.</p>

<p>‘Rose’ Noble lay as he had fallen, flat on his
back.</p>

<p>“Put up your hands,” said Mansel.</p>

<p>Ellis did so.</p>

<p>“You in the cap,” said Mansel, addressing the
man who had driven, “take your seat in the car
and turn her round.”</p>

<p>When this was done, he bade them take up
‘Rose’ Noble and put him into the car. They
did so. Then he called the bearers to stand by
Ellis’ side.</p>

<p>“You three will follow the car, with your hands
above your heads. Drive on.”</p>

<p>The car moved off, but for a moment it looked as
though the three pedestrians would rebel. However,
I suppose they thought better of it, for, after looking
at one another, like sulky dogs, with one accord
they turned, and, using what dignity they could,
walked out of the courtyard and down the road.
Carson and Rowley followed as far as the bend;
and that was the finish of a passage which was to
spoil for ever my enjoyment of ‘strong’ play-acting,
be it never so excellently done: for this
was the real thing, and to this day the bare
remembrance of the affair will quicken the beating
of my heart and set my nerves tingling.</p>

<p>Here let me say that Mansel was a good deal
troubled about ‘Rose’ Noble, fearing that the
blow he had dealt him might prove fatal, for, as I
afterwards learned, he had been a famous boxer,
but had long abandoned the sport for fear of killing
his man.</p>

<p>However, as I shall show, he need have felt no
concern.</p>

<p>Before we returned to the well, the six of us
sought for points at which a man could play sentry
with some success. This was by no means easy
because of the woods, but, after a while, we found
a ruined shrine on the top of a hill, which commanded
the road for some way beyond the bend, and all
that side of the estate. The shrine was about six
hundred yards from the house, but there was no
point nearer one half so valuable. With a sentinel
there, we should be safe upon three sides, for to
our North lay the river, and from the shrine you
could watch the East and South: but the West
was the devil. Search as we would, we could find
no point at all whence the eye could observe so
much as a third of the ground, and I think it would
have taken four sentries to make that side secure.
We had, therefore, perforce to be content with the
hill-top beyond the great well. We did no more
than settle these points that afternoon, nor did we
visit them again the next day, but thereafter, from
dawn to sunset, they were to be regularly occupied.
This, to our great inconvenience: but it could not
be helped.</p>

<p>We had scarce got back to the well and found
that the water had risen eighteen inches in the
last three hours, when the landlord of the inn
arrived.</p>

<p>He was full of the strangers, who had stopped to
ask their way at the inn and had lately returned in
such disorder of mind, and was plainly agog to
know their business and what was afoot.</p>

<p>We told him that of them we knew nothing till
ten days ago, when they had stopped us in a forest
with plain intent to rob. We told how we had bayed
them, and how I had crippled their car, and supposed
that it was sheer rage and a desire to revenge that
injury which had induced the villains to dog us to
Wagensburg. But, Mansel added, he imagined we
had settled their hash, and, unless they were
passing venomous, we should not be troubled
again.</p>

<p>“All the same,” said he, “they are armed, and
I’m taking no chances at all. So, when you come
up to see us, come by day, for by night all men look
alike, and we don’t want to hurt our friends.”</p>

<p>The landlord seemed perturbed at our tale,
because, while Ellis and the driver had presently
left in the car, the other malefactors were proposing
to stay at his inn. ‘Rose’ Noble, who was still
unconscious, had been carried upstairs to bed, and,
though no German had been spoken, the others had
made him know that they must have lodging and
food. They had not asked for a doctor, and seemed
untroubled by the condition of their friend: except
for one battered suit-case, they had no luggage:
their manner was overbearing and such as might
be expected of lawless men.</p>

<p>We purposely offered him cold comfort, and,
such was his agitation to think that he had been
saddled with such undesirable guests, that the poor
man displayed little interest in what he had come
to see, and, merely inquiring what headway we
were making against the springs, abstractedly
accepted an order for supplies and set off on his
way back to Lerai, like a man in an ugly dream.</p>

<p>By sundown we had taken another seventeen
feet of water out of the well.</p>

<p>We were so much exhausted with our labour
that not one of us was fit to descend, but we were
all highly pleased to think that our net gain that
day had been twenty-three feet and a half, and
that now but thirty-nine feet of water remained
in the well. Indeed, though no one said so, I
believe each hoped in his heart that by the evening
of the next day we should discover the shaft.</p>

<p>I suppose, that in view of our progress, it was
natural to nurse such hopes, for, though we knew
that the water would rise in the night, we had so
far no knowledge of the well beyond that it had a
reputation which had never been determinedly
attacked; but our chagrin in the morning was the
more bitter, and it was when we pulled up our
measuring-line in the grey of the dawn that for
the first time we knew that, when the Count
committed his two leather bags to the well, he made
them wards of a Court which respected no man,
which just and unjust alike might seek to move
in vain.</p>

<p>The forces of Nature were against us, and, whilst
we slept, the springs had undone our labour, much
as Penelope unravelled her famous web.</p>

<p>During the night, the water had risen no less
than thirteen feet.</p>

<p>This was a great blow, for, though we were yet
ten feet six to the good, it showed that the day
before we must have passed springs which gave at a
great pace, and that it was more than likely that
the lower we went, the slighter would be our gain,
until at length we should lose as much by night as
we had won by day. In that case, the shaft would
only be discovered by a furious spell of work, at
the end of which, however exhausted we might be,
an effort to reach the chamber would have to be
instantly made, while those who did not descend
must ceaselessly labour to keep the water down,
and so save their fellows from being trapped.</p>

<p>Now, this was all conjecture, to which, I fancy,
the dreariness of the hour and a threatening sky
made generous godmothers, but there was no
blinking the facts that our supper and a short
night’s rest had proved extremely expensive, and
that, without a sufficiency of food and sleep, we
should never be able to counter the activity of the
springs.</p>

<p>That any of the thieves would return to trouble
us this day seemed so improbable that we took no
precautions beyond keeping a servant in the house,
and, except that Hanbury and Carson spent an hour
laying wire to the west of the castle, to complete
our system, we were five to fight the water all
day long.</p>

<p>When, half an hour after sunset, the last bucketful
was pulled up, there were only nineteen feet of
water left in the well.</p>

<p>Had it been possible, we would have returned
after supper and made one mighty effort to reach the
shaft, but, though Mansel and Carson and I could, I
believe, have continued, George Hanbury and
Rowley and Bell could hardly stand for fatigue, and
would, I think, have fallen asleep at their work:
and, since to ask men so weary to play sentry
would have been waste of breath, there was nothing
to do but look forward to the following day.</p>

<p>Mansel, however, consented to my going down
the well, to see what was to be seen, and locate, if
I could, with a bar the mouth of the shaft.</p>

<p>Carson had made a small seat, like that of a
swing; and this was made fast to the chain. Beneath
the seat was a hook, and on this we hung the lamp:
the bar we lashed so that it dangled below, just
clear of my feet. Then I put on a coat and a
lifeline, and they let me down.</p>

<p>The journey seemed unending, and I soon
unhooked the lamp and looked about me whilst I
was going down.</p>

<p>The condition of the masonry was as perfect as
it had been above, but between most of the edges
of the stones a thin blade of a knife would have
passed, and this, I suppose, meant that they had
been laid without cement to suffer the entry of the
springs. That these were active was manifest, for
fifty feet down the walls were running with water;
but there was no gush anywhere, and where the
great springs rose I could not tell. When I came
to the pool, it was troubled on every side, yet so
faintly that, had I not already known what to
expect, I would not have believed that so unobtrusive
an industry could have been so swift and
masterful.</p>

<p>I then hung up the search-light, and took hold of
the bar, and, signalling them to lower me till the
water was over my knees, began to seek the shaft
with all my might. But everything was against
me. The bar was too short and too heavy: the
water seemed like treacle to my weary arms; if
I leaned to one side, my seat swung at once to the
other, as though it would cast me out. At last,
by rocking myself to and fro, I managed to sound
every side for about three feet; but I could do no
better and, when I had almost lost my seat for the
second time, I took a last look round and gave the
signal for the others to pull me up.</p>

<p>Now, I had looked to see if the niches I had found
in the sides the day before ran all the way down
the well: and I had found that they did so. But
not until I was rising did it occur to me that, as
the niches had been used, so they could serve
again, and that the value of a stage, however rough,
from which to search for the shaft or conduct any
operations would be inestimable. Before, therefore,
they landed me, I begged Mansel to send for
a lath with which I might measure how long the
beams must be; and, after a little, he let me have
my way.</p>

<p>The measurement took some time, for,
remembering how nearly I had twice lost my seat,
I dared make no movement at all except with my
hands, and Mansel and Carson had to hold me
close to the wall. Then I could not see, until
they had fixed the light, and twice the lath had to
be returned and sawn to another length. However,
at last it was over, and I was pulled up. And,
after supper, that night Carson and I cut two
rafters out of an outhouse roof; and, since of the
wood in the stables three planks remained, before
we lay down to sleep we had our stage.</p>

<div><span class="pageno" title="108" id="Page_108"></span><h1>CHAPTER IV       THE ATTACK ON THE WELL</h1></div>

<p class="noindent"><span class="lead-in">During</span> the night the water rose twenty feet.</p>

<p>It went against the grain to post two sentries,
when with twelve, or even ten arms we might have
had the well empty by four o’clock. But to be
surprised at such gruelling labour would have
meant for us the end of everything; for, shaken
and stripped and breathless, we could have put up
no fight, and, except for the parapet of the well,
there was no cover to hand.</p>

<p>Still, it seemed very likely that four of us, working
hard, would be able to draw so much water before
the sun went down that, with the help of the stage,
we should find the mouth of the shaft. And,
once we knew on which side of the well that lay,
though the springs should deny us passage, at
least we should have a second string to our bow.</p>

<p>With this object, we laboured till lunch-time,
like men possessed—at least, Mansel and the
servants laboured, whilst I sat above on the peak
with a rifle across my knees. Hanbury was at the
shrine.</p>

<p>At one Rowley took my place, and Carson
Hanbury’s.</p>

<p>This relief had not long been done, and we were
at lunch in the meadow, when—as Hanbury had
told us would happen, for he had seen him <span class="it">en
route</span>—the landlord of the inn arrived.</p>

<p>As he emerged from the wood, he looked around
him, and, when he saw us at meat, he threw up
his hands.</p>

<p>I made sure, as did Mansel, that ‘Rose’ Noble
was dead, but it soon appeared that the fellow was
only distressed to find that our zeal to attempt to
empty the well was unabated.</p>

<p>“Sirs,” he cried, bubbling, “it is dreadful to
see you so bent upon so hopeless a task. You
are killing yourselves in vain. I have sought
everywhere for helpers, but, when I tell them for
what their help is required, they laugh me to
scorn. You will not get a man in all Carinthia.
And the trout lie in the streams about you, thick
as autumn leaves.”</p>

<p>Mansel laughed.</p>

<p>“The springs are the devil,” he said; “but we
haven’t given up hope.”</p>

<p>“Ah, sir,” said the innkeeper, “but listen.
You have not begun. You are still dealing with
the first spring. When you are twenty feet
down——”</p>

<p>“Make it forty,” said Mansel. “To be exact,
forty-three.”</p>

<p>Lest he should think we were boasting, we took
him to the well and showed him the measuring-line:
his amazement was ludicrous, for he seemed
unable to speak and gaped upon us as though we
were demi-gods; and such in his sight, I suppose,
we were, for in three days we had gone far to shatter
a tradition which had endured for a century and
a half.</p>

<p>Then Mansel asked him of his guests. Of these
he spoke abstractedly, for his mind was full of
what we had done with the well; but we learned
that ‘Rose’ Noble was recovered, and that
Ellis had come back this morning and taken the
three away—he knew not whither, but imagined
to Salzburg. They had paid him nothing for
their lodging, of which they had constantly
complained, but had made him understand that
they would come back. What more he said I
cannot remember, save that the stores we had
ordered were piled by the kitchen door, and after
a little he left, still plainly bewildered by the progress
which we had made.</p>

<p>I was for instantly withdrawing the two sentinels
and making a mighty effort to get the treasure
that night, but to this Mansel would not consent,
for fear that ‘Rose’ Noble and Ellis were not
gone at all, but had pretended departure in the
hope that the news would reach us and throw us
off our guard. He suggested, instead, that Hanbury
and I should only work for two hours, and should
then relieve Carson and Rowley, “for in that way,”
he said, “at sundown Carson and Rowley will be
done and can go to bed, but you and Hanbury will
be as fresh as paint: and, if Bell and I go gently
this afternoon, we shall still have something to
spare at nine o’clock.”</p>

<p>To Hanbury and me this arrangement seemed
more than good, except that we both begged Mansel
to give himself a rest. But of this he would not
hear. For the next two hours, therefore, we
worked as hard as we could, but the honours of
that day went to Carson and Rowley, for, while
I sat on my hill-top, I could hear them at work,
and, knowing how severe was the labour, I would
not have believed that two men could maintain
the pace they did for nearly five hours.</p>

<p>When I came in at sundown, the two were ready
to drop, but they looked very pleased, and Mansel
told me with a smile that they had uncovered
the shaft.</p>

<p>Half an hour back, he said, the suck and gurgle
of air disputing with water had told its tale, and,
though to ascend at once might be impossible, enough
of the mouth was open for us to survey the shaft.</p>

<p>Then Hanbury and I made haste to fetch the
stage, and Carson and Rowley were ordered back
to the house. They were reluctant to go, but
Mansel was determined that they should have
food and rest, “and, if you stay here,” said he,
“you will have neither, but will drift into helping
us when you’re too tired to help yourselves. It’s
possible that we may need you in two hours’ time;
so go and eat and sleep, while you have the chance.”</p>

<p>Bell and Tester went with them, for Bell was to
keep watch and prepare some food, and Tester
was to be tied up, because he was sure to be
distressed if Mansel went down the well and might
even fall down in some effort to comfort his lord.</p>

<p>Then I went down, with the light and the beams
which Carson and I had cut the night before.</p>

<p>A foot or more of the mouth of the shaft was
visible, and, by directing the light, I could see the
steps within; but I never beheld a place which
looked so black and uninviting, and there was now
in the depths of the well an odour which I cannot
exactly describe. It seemed to be a bad smell,
grown faint with age.</p>

<p>I had my beams in place in a minute of time, and
then gave the signal for Hanbury to lower the
planks.</p>

<p>As might have been expected, the shaft was
between the two beams, but so much had I twisted
and turned during my descent that, though I knew
from the niches that it must run North or South, I
could tell no more. But, when the planks were
in place, Mansel lowered the measuring-line, and
under my direction, moved it until it hung plumb
over the middle of the mouth. This showed, as
I afterwards found, that the shaft ran North,
towards the castle: and Hanbury marked the
place by driving a peg out of sight into the ground.</p>

<p>The stage, when I had built it, lay some six
inches below the lintel of the mouth of the shaft.
The water was rising fast, and I set the planks as
close to the mouth as I could, so that by using the
windlass, without disturbing the stage, we could do
something to keep the water down.</p>

<p>Then I was pulled up, and Mansel made ready
to descend.</p>

<p>Over his clothes he put on a waterproof suit,
tight-fitting at the wrists and ankles as at the
waist and throat. In his pocket he had a torch,
and that was all.</p>

<p>Communication by shouting up and down the
well had proved unsatisfactory, for the words
arrived distorted and often unrecognizable: while
I was below, therefore, Mansel and Hanbury had
lashed a spring to the pulley-beam and fastened a
cord to the spring. This rude apparatus worked
very well, for, when the cord was pulled tight and
then let go, the spring hit the beam with a smack
which there was no mistaking. To the other end
of the cord was fastened a biscuit-tin, which, in
case of trouble, we were to dash against the wall.
We also took the bell which rang from the kitchen
hall and hung it inside the parapet so that, were
it to ring while he was below, Mansel would receive
so important a signal direct.</p>

<p>So soon as Mansel was down, we were to start
baling, and the signal that he was clear and that
we could pull up the seat was to be two strokes of
the spring upon the pulley-beam.</p>

<p>We had hardly begun to lower him, when, to our
dismay, the search-light, which I had left burning
upon the stage, went suddenly out: but Mansel
cried to us to go on, and a moment later I saw the
flash of his torch. Compared with the search-light,
this threw a miserable beam; and I was not at all
happy to think he was going down thus embarrassed
to a place which had seemed so dreadful when it
was full of light. I think we all three had hopes
that, when he was down, he would be able to put
in order what had gone wrong: but, if we had,
they were vain, for, after a little, the spring struck
twice upon the beam, and, when we pulled up the
seat by which we had let him down, the lamp
was hanging upon the hook beneath.</p>

<p>Then we let down a bucket and started to bale,
and we knew that Mansel was in the shaft, for
the light which his torch had been giving had
disappeared.</p>

<p>And, except that we laboured steadily for about
five minutes, that is as much as I know of that
day’s work, for then I was dealt such a blow on
the back of my head that I fell down like an ox
and lost consciousness.</p>

<hr />

<p>Hanbury saw me fall, but, before he had time to
cry out, he had been served as I had, and, since he
was still senseless when I sat up, Mansel alone of
us three can speak to what followed the assault.</p>

<p>This was the tale he told us so soon as he
could.</p>

<p>“I made a bridge of a plank from the stage to a
step in the shaft, and so spared myself immersion;
and, though I got pretty wet, I was able to keep
the torch out of the water. Then I drew the plank
after me into the shaft, for, if I had left it in place,
the bucket would have fouled it when you began to
bale.</p>

<p>“The shaft is three feet wide by about five high.
Its walls and steps are of stones from the riverbed,
laid in cement. Its roof is curved and built of
stones similar to those used for the well. I imagine
it owes its style to the Count’s desire for secrecy,
for all the stuff used to build it might well have
gone into the well. The walls of the latter are
certainly backed with pebbles as high as the first
spring.</p>

<p>“The going was very unpleasant, not to say
dangerous, for the steps are very rough and covered
with slime. I had hoped, by counting them and
measuring the rises and treads, to get figures from
which Hanbury could tell pretty well where the
chamber lies; but their flight is so irregular that
without a rule I could do nothing valuable. So far
as I could make out, the shaft runs dead straight.
The air was abominable.</p>

<p>“I had taken some twenty-five steps before I
slipped.</p>

<p>“Now a fall in that shaft would be an ugly
business, and I don’t think you could complain if
you broke no more than a leg: and, as, all things
considered, it’s not the place you’d choose for a
first-class smash, I saved myself at the cost of
dropping the torch. This, of course, was broken
by the fall, and, although I recovered it, it would
give me no light.</p>

<p>“To proceed in the dark seemed futile, and I
had just begun to retrace my steps, when I became
aware of a light which came from the well.</p>

<p>“I at once assumed that you had adjusted the
search-light and were letting it down, for I heard
the windlass working: but a moment later I
thought that I heard a whistle, and stopped in
my tracks.</p>

<p>“Someone alighted heavily on the stage.</p>

<p>“But for the whistle I had heard, that it was
not you, Chandos, would never have entered my
head. As it was, I made sure you would hail me
almost at once: but, remembering that all things
are possible, I waited for you to speak.</p>

<p>“That I did so was just as well, for I was still
waiting when somebody snuffed and spat.</p>

<p>“Well, that eliminated any of us.</p>

<p>“I can’t pretend I wasn’t shaken.</p>

<p>“I dared not think what had happened to you
and Hanbury: the servants, presumably, were
obediently keeping the house: the enemy had the
windlass: and I was trapped, good and proper, in
a blind tunnel five by three, and eighty-odd feet
below ground.</p>

<p>“All of a sudden I wondered if the enemy knew
I was there.</p>

<p>“I decided that the odds were that he did not.
Unless he had seen me go down, there was no
reason why he should know. The search-light had
failed: my torch had gone out: although the
stage was there, I had withdrawn my bridge. The
fact that he made no attempt to conceal his presence
assured me that I was right.</p>

<p>“Instinctively I began to reascend the shaft.</p>

<p>“I had not thought that even ‘Rose’ Noble
would suspect our work at the well, and the reflection
that I had been so heartily outwitted and
outclassed was very bitter. The attack had been
well done. One minute, you and Hanbury were
baling: the next, one of the five was descending
the well. I assumed that he had come to reconnoitre.
When he had made his report, the others
would bale for a while, and then the actual attempt
to lift the treasure would be made. Unless I could
reach the servants, I did not see how this could
fail.</p>

<p>“I had taken five or six steps, when a splash
told me that my man was making the shaft.
Though there was still one spare plank, the idea of
a bridge had not, I suppose, occurred to him: but,
after a struggle—in which he went under water—I
heard him make the steps. For a moment he
stood grunting and blowing, and trying to get his
breath. Then he began to ascend. This surprised
me, for I had made certain that he would first
produce a torch; but what astonished me still more
was the progress he made, for he climbed as well as
I had when I had seen my way.</p>

<p>“So we went up the shaft in single file, some
thirty odd steps apart.</p>

<p>“My one idea, of course, was to get to the top
of the well. The only way to do this was, unknown
to the rest of the gang, to take his place and let
them haul me up in his stead. What would happen
when they saw their mistake no one could tell, but
with luck I should have been landed before they
saw what they had done.</p>

<p>“It was quite plain that, if I could escape the
notice of the man in the shaft, I should stand a
better chance of taking his place. Even if I had
had room, I could not see to hit him under the jaw:
unless I could knock him senseless, he would
probably let out a yell: I was unarmed, and by a
hand-to-hand fight in the dark in such a place I
was as likely to come to harm as was he. But
what weighed with me most of all was the natural
reluctance to kill. Unless I laid him out, his
shouts would give me away: but, if I put him out
of action, in view of the pace at which the water
was rising, he would either be drowned or trapped—probably
trapped. And it seemed a shocking
thing to sentence a fellow creature to such a terrible
doom.</p>

<p>“To avoid him in the shaft was out of the
question, but I thought if I could reach the
chamber, I could let him go by to the treasure and
start right back.</p>

<p>“I was not afraid of his hearing me, for I was
going quietly, but he made a lot of noise.</p>

<p>“The shaft seemed endless, but at last I felt a
step which was clear of ooze. I took it, and two
more, and then something I hadn’t expected told
me that I was upon the threshold of the chamber
itself. <span class="it">Four iron bars, set up on end in the way.</span>
From their shape, I should say they were crow-bars,
such as a well-digger used about his business.
And I don’t suppose it took five minutes to bed
them, but, once the cement had set, well, I don’t
know if you’ve ever filed iron, but it’s tedious work.
Top and bottom, they were bedded into hewn
stone. There’s no doubt about it, Axel the Red
was a very careful man.</p>

<p>“That it would come to a fight was now certain;
so I set my back to the bars and awaited my
man.</p>

<p>“Suddenly I heard the bell ring at the top of
the well.</p>

<p>“My man heard it, too, and stopped—about
ten steps away.</p>

<p>“Of course, I knew what it meant, and praised
God. But he was clearly alarmed, for he was
holding his breath, and, I fancy, straining his ears.
I know exactly how he felt, and, believe me, I don’t
blame him.</p>

<p>“The bell rang again.</p>

<p>“A moment later I heard him begin to descend.</p>

<p>“Be sure I followed.</p>

<p>“Before I did so, I tested every bar. They were
all the same size, nearly an inch thick, not very
rusty: and not one of them would budge.</p>

<p>“Such plan as I now had was to follow him into
the well. When he had been reassured by those at
the top, I thought it more than likely that he would
re-enter the shaft and try once again to reach the
chamber: but, whether he did or no, once I was
in the well, I should be immeasurably better placed
to deal with whatever arose, if for no other reason,
because to occupy that shaft, yet not dwell upon
its undesirability as a retreat is almost impossible.</p>

<p>“And here let me say that, treasure or no, I
was immensely surprised to find that any one of
the five could withstand its terrors so well. Of the
ugly side of Nature that kind of man usually
fights very shy. Ellis, for instance, would never
have gone down the well. I knew it wasn’t ‘Rose’
Noble, and Punter would have cursed: but, whichever
of the others it was, he was a brave man, for,
if the devil had not been driving, I wouldn’t have
gone up that shaft without a light for any money.</p>

<p>“The fellow descended steadily, and I came down
after as fast as I dared.</p>

<p>“At last I heard him touch water. Then he
took a deep breath and floundered out of the shaft.
By the time he was on the stage I was still ten
steps up. The water had risen, for they had not
thought to bale, and the stage was submerged.</p>

<p>“I made what haste I could, but I heard no
colloquy. I imagine that he whistled, but, as I
slid into the water, the windlass began to work;
and, when I took hold of the stage and could look
about me, I saw my man in mid-air, lantern and all.</p>

<p>“I did not know whether to be sorry or glad,
but, what was much worse, I did not know what
to think. What mystified me was their silence.
This seemed unnatural, and I could think of no
reason why they should take him up without a
word.</p>

<p>“I had pulled myself on to the stage and was
listening to the click of the ratchet and watching
the lantern rise, when, all of a sudden, I heard the
windlass stop.</p>

<p>“Then a shot was fired, and, after a moment, I
heard a flurry of voices at the top of the well.</p>

<p>“I assumed that the servants had come to
dispute possession of the windlass, and, generally,
counter the attack; and I would have given a lot
to be above ground: but, all the same, it struck
me that, ill placed as I was, I would very much
sooner be standing upon the stage than dangling
from the end of the chain some forty feet up.</p>

<p>“I had just come to this conclusion when the
man who was in mid-air expressed the same view:
at least, from the apprehension with which he
invested an oath, I gathered that he felt his
position. And, directly I heard his voice, <span class="it">I knew
who it was</span>. And the knowledge, as you may
imagine, gave me plenty of food for thought.</p>

<p>“So I stood very still and waited, with my eyes
on the lantern and my back against the wall.”</p>

<p>That was as much as Mansel had to tell, and,
since there was but one shot fired at that time, I
can take up the story without a break, because I
had just sat up and was trying to collect my wits,
when I heard a cry and men running, and then
the sound of a shot.</p>

<p>The moon had not yet risen, but I could make out
the well and that I was sitting above it, half in and
half out of the wood. My wrists were bound
behind me, and my head was aching very much.</p>

<p>There were figures about the well, and I heard
‘Rose’ Noble’s voice.</p>

<p>“Who fired?” he said. “We or they?”</p>

<p>“I did,” said Punter. “They saw me coming
and ran.”</p>

<p>“Pardon me,” said ‘Rose’ Noble: “they
heard you. You don’t know how to move. How
many were there?”</p>

<p>“Two,” said Punter. “Servants, I think; but
it may have been the two pups.”</p>

<p>“That’s right,” said another voice. “They was
busy crankin’ the well.”</p>

<p>Here one of them must have looked down and
seen the light, for there was a cry of surprise, and
then a buzz of exclamation, of which I could make
no sense.</p>

<p>Then ‘Rose’ Noble spoke again.</p>

<p>“Quite so,” he said. “Quite so. If there’s
one down there, we’ve got him by the short hairs.
And is that as far as you can see? Damn it,” he
cried, “lift up your —— eyes! THINK! <span class="it">What
are they doing by night down in this well?</span> You
may have a twist for sweet water, but——”</p>

<p>The rest of his sentence was drowned in a burst
of appreciation of his discovery: and I never
heard grown men so abandon themselves to their
glee, for they shouted and stamped and laughed,
like so many lunatics, and nothing that ‘Rose’
Noble could do could bring them to order.</p>

<p>In the midst of the flurry another came running
up, and then I heard Ellis’ voice.</p>

<p>As far as I could make out, they were now all
five by the well, but, since they all continued to
speak at once, I could hear nothing that was said.</p>

<p>Then Ellis was asked some question, and I heard
his reply.</p>

<p>“I think they’re out,” he said. “There’s no
light or sound. When I tried the door, a dog
barked: but that was locked, and the ground-floor
windows are barred.”</p>

<p>“There’s three of them somewhere,” said
‘Rose’ Noble. “Two of them ran from here,
and there’s one below.”</p>

<p>“God give it’s Little Willie,” said Ellis, and
sucked in his breath. “I’d like to meet him like
this.”</p>

<p>“Me, too,” said Punter.</p>

<p>“Big Willie, you mean,” said ‘Rose’ Noble.
“Bag him, and we’ve got the lot. Besides,” he
drawled, “if anyone’s thinking of scores, I reckon
I’ve one to settle that takes precedence.”</p>

<p>The oath with which he enforced this dark
saying was the most dreadful I have ever heard,
and I began to strive, like a madman, to free my
wrists, for the thought that Mansel was about to
deliver himself into such cruel and bloody hands
was insupportable.</p>

<p>“Job,” said ‘Rose’ Noble, “back to the path
and watch. If anything moves, let it have it:
we don’t want to be disturbed.”</p>

<p>Here one of them found the search-light, and they
wasted a minute or two trying to make it light.
Then they kept peering down the well and whispering
and cursing one another for making a noise. Indeed,
I never saw men so plainly out of their element, for
they did not seem to remember that those they
had put to flight had been using the windlass, or
to notice what must have been manifest—that the
lantern below them was nowhere near the water:
and it was only after a lot of argument that two
took hold of the windlass and felt the weight on
the chain.</p>

<p>“It’s loaded,” I heard one say. “ ’Eavy as
lead.”</p>

<p>At that they all peered over the parapet again,
and I did not know what to think, but was greatly
afraid that the weight must be Mansel himself.</p>

<p>Here my attention was diverted to something
which stirred by my side. To my relief, it proved
to be Hanbury, bound as was I. I managed to
move until I had my mouth to his ear, and, as soon
as he could receive it, I told him as much as I knew.
Except that his head was aching, he did not seem
to be hurt, and, when I suggested that I should
try to unfasten the cord which was binding his
wrists, he turned on his side and put them up
without a word. At once I turned my back on him
and got to work upon the knots, but I made no
progress, and, after a minute or so, his fingers
brushed mine aside, and fell to work in their stead.</p>

<p>At that moment I heard ‘Rose’ Noble say
“Give way,” and at once two men at the windlass
began to turn.</p>

<p>The moon was rising now, and I could see that
the others were on their knees or crouching beside
the parapet, ready, no doubt, to cover Mansel the
moment he reached the top. That they thought
this was necessary argues their respect for his
arm, for even they must have realized that four
men can never have had one at a greater
disadvantage.</p>

<p>Hanbury worked feverishly, while I tried to think
what to do.</p>

<p>Unless he were in danger of death, to attempt
to assist Mansel until we had arms of some sort
would be the act of a fool. I, therefore, decided
that, when once we were free, we must try to reach
the kitchen, join forces with the servants, and
deliver a counter-attack.</p>

<p>Hanbury had freed me, and I was wrestling with
his bonds, when a faint light began to appear within
the well.</p>

<p>This horrified us both, for we thought, of course,
that it was that of Mansel’s torch; and that he
should show a light which could assist none but his
foes was not his way. Indeed, we now fully expected
any moment to hear him address us, and ask why
on earth we had kept him waiting so long.</p>

<p>The glow in the well was very definite when at
last I had Hanbury free, and at once we crept out
of the wood and began to crawl by its edge towards
the house.</p>

<p>I was in front, and going as fast as I dared, when
I came face to face with Bell, who was crawling the
opposite way. The first I knew of it was the
barrel of a pistol pressed tight against my temple,
for he had seen me coming, and had not known
who it was.</p>

<p>Then, lying there, I told him as much as I knew,
and he said that Carson and Rowley had taken up
positions on either side of the path. He was to
crawl to where he could see and hear what was
going on at the well, and, at a flash from his torch,
the three were to count two seconds and then open
fire. The idea was to drive the thieves into the
combe into which the gutter ran, but at any cost
to keep them away from the house and out of the
two woods, for that would give a chance of rescue
to the occupant of the well.</p>

<p>I at once fell in with his plan, whereupon we
decided that I should take his place. He, therefore,
gave me his torch and one of the pistols he had, and,
when I had arranged for him to give his other to
Hanbury, and then return to Carson, I went about.
As I passed Hanbury, I told him that Bell was
there and, when he had got his pistol, to stay where
he was.</p>

<p>I had hardly done so when a sudden clamour
arose at the top of the well. The light was gone,
but all four men were peering at something within.</p>

<p>At length:</p>

<p>“Haul him in,” said ‘Rose’ Noble.</p>

<p>They were very inexpert and mortally afraid of
falling, and hard words were exchanged and much
swearing before their burden was landed roughly
enough, with two on the top of him and the other
two standing by.</p>

<p>Before a torch could be lighted, Punter let out
a yell.</p>

<p>“By ——,” he cried, “it’s that —— that keeps
the inn!”</p>

<p>To me his words came like a thunderbolt, and,
between my relief and my astonishment, for a
moment I felt quite dazed. Then it occurred to
me that this was the moment to attack and that
a sudden assault, coming upon them while they
were so much engaged with the turn events had
taken and were still uncertain what to think or do,
would probably fare better than we could have
hoped: so I took my pistol and torch, and, directing
the face of the latter towards the house, gave the
agreed signal, counted two seconds, and fired.</p>

<p>This was as Carson had arranged, and nothing
could have been better, for the five of us fired almost
at once, and so unexpected a volley would, I should
think, have disconcerted a Napoleon himself.</p>

<p>No one fell, and, without so much as a cry, the
four thieves scattered and ran straight for the
combe—<span class="it">with the innkeeper pelting behind</span>. Two of
them fouled the gutter and fell to glory, but, perhaps
because they had run into the moonlight, they were
not content to lie, and, picking themselves up, rushed
violently after their fellows down the slope, like
the Gadarene swine. This much I saw, for I had
run along by the edge of the wood, and I sent a
shot after them, before hastening to the well.</p>

<p>The seat was not on the hook, but only a bight
of rope, so that, had I not seen him run, I should
have thought that the innkeeper was ready to drop
with fatigue: but we had the seat slung in a
twinkling, and Carson and Rowley lowered it into
the well.</p>

<p>I must confess that I waited in fear and trembling
for I knew that the water must have risen a foot
or more, and the thought that the landlord had
emerged alive from the well filled me with the
gravest misgivings for Mansel’s safety. I was also
quite sure that the thieves would presently return,
when, if we had not raised Mansel, we should
present to them as fair a target as they had offered
us, and the likelihood that they would bungle a
second and better chance seemed small indeed.</p>

<p>When the seat was nearly down, Hanbury took
hold of the signal cord and swung the biscuit-tin,
and a moment later, to our indescribable relief,
the spring struck once upon the beam. At once
we locked the windlass: and, in an instant, another
two blows gave us the signal to hoist.</p>

<p>Then we all five fell upon the windlass, and
brought Mansel up with a run, and, only waiting
to take up the search-light, the seat, the measuring-line
and the bell, we left the meadow in good order,
with Carson, rifle in hand, bringing up the rear.</p>

<p>Two minutes later we were within the house,
where Tester greeted Mansel as though in fact he
knew that he was risen from the dead.</p>

<p>Here I will say what I should have set down
before, namely, that the walls of the kitchen-quarters
were immensely thick, and must have
formed part of the castle which was burned down.
The windows were high above ground and heavily
barred, and, since we had hung up curtains some
distance away from the frames, neither by day
nor night could anyone from without see into the
rooms.</p>

<p>Then supper was served, and Mansel and Bell
and I told each his tale.</p>

<p>Bell had little to add to what I now knew: but
one thing that he said we all found interesting, and
that was that the second attack had undoubtedly
come from the South, that is to say, from the
combe into which we had packed the thieves,
“for,” said Bell, “although the alarum bell went,
it went but once, and I think it was rung by one
man coming up from the West: but, when the
innkeeper’s party took to their heels, they ran
North by the path through the woods and past
the house: and, since I am sure that was not how
they had come, they must have done so because
they were driven that way.”</p>

<p>Only when all had been said, did I remember Job.</p>

<p>When I spoke of him, Carson smiled.</p>

<p>“I heard what ‘Rose’ Noble said, sir, so it was
hardly fair. He said ‘Back to the path, and watch,’
so <span class="it">I did as he said</span>.”</p>

<p>“I hope you didn’t kill him,” said Mansel.</p>

<p>“Oh, no, sir,” said Carson, Then he hesitated.
“I was going to ask you, sir—supposing it had been
‘Rose’ Noble . . . ?”</p>

<p>Mansel shook his head.</p>

<p>“Certainly not,” he said. “And here let me
say you can all of you thank your stars that you’re
such bad shots. I don’t wish to sound ungrateful,
but, unless I’m being tortured, you must leave these
volleys alone. That’s the way people get hurt.
<span class="it">Except in the last resort, you are never to fire to hit.</span>
That is the handicap or disadvantage of——”</p>

<p>As Tester growled, some object parted the
curtains, and fell clean on to a loose cushion which
belonged to the Rolls.</p>

<p>The terrier leapt at it, but, before I could
think, Mansel had sent him flying and, with a great
cry of ‘DOWN!’ had hurled the thing into the
kitchen and fallen upon his face.</p>

<p>The next instant a most frightful explosion shook
the house, which I verily thought was coming about
our ears; for the lights went out and the whole of
the plaster of the ceiling in the servants’ hall fell
down on our heads; and, what with the concussion
and the dust and the tinkle of falling glass and the
sudden return of the pain in the back of my head,
my wits very nearly left me, and, when I heard
Mansel speaking, he seemed to be a great
way off.</p>

<p>“Is anyone hurt?” he said, and called the roll.</p>

<p>Mercifully, no one was touched, for we had been
all six in the servants’ hall: and, when he called
Tester, I heard the dog rush in answer to lick his
face.</p>

<p>“That was a bomb,” said Hanbury dazedly.</p>

<p>“That was a bomb,” said Mansel. “And now
I withdraw what I said a moment ago. <span class="it">You can
shoot ‘Rose’ Noble and Ellis as soon as you get
the chance.</span>”</p>

<hr />

<p>I have tried to analyse the feelings of us all at
that time, with poor success.</p>

<p>Whether the lust for gold had mastered us,
whether a hatred of the thieves suffused our outlook,
whether their attempts to thwart it had but
toughened our resolve I cannot say: but I know
that after the bomb had been thrown into our
midst, we would, one and all, have died in agony
rather than let the treasure fall into the enemy’s
hands.</p>

<p>That we found the act an outrage was, I think,
reasonable: we had certainly fired upon them, as
Mansel had warned them we should do: but that
we had done in the open, where they had a good
chance of escape and every opportunity of defending
themselves. In return, they had taken a weapon
of a barbarous kind, and had used it in circumstances
so favourable to its energy that, had it not
fallen where it did, and had the room door been shut,
we must all six have perished miserably.</p>

<p>In view of what had happened since sundown, we
knew that one phase of our struggle had come to
an untimely end. Our cake, so nearly baked, had
fallen back into dough, and every plan we had made
was now impracticable. But, in spite of all there
was to be decided, we were too much obsessed
and confounded by the attempt which had so
nearly made an end of us all to bring our minds to
bear at all profitably upon other matters. Add to
this that Mansel was physically worn out, and
that Hanbury and I were suffering from the blows
we had severally received.</p>

<p>We, therefore, lay down to sleep in the harness-room,
to which, directly after the explosion, we had
withdrawn. Tester was put in the Rolls, to watch
the stables, and the servants were to take turns of
guarding the passage which led to the kitchen hall.
Yet, weary as we were, for a long time we could
not sleep: and, ridiculously enough, Hanbury and
I were greatly troubled by thirst: but, since our
store of water stood in the kitchen, there was
nothing to be done, for, supposing it was still
available, no one could have reached it in silence
or without showing a light.</p>

<div><span class="pageno" title="136" id="Page_136"></span><h1>CHAPTER V       WE GO TO GROUND</h1></div>

<p class="noindent"><span class="lead-in">By</span> the time I awoke the next morning some order
had been restored, and a table, upon which Rowley
was serving breakfast, had been set in the harness-room.
My head was sore and tender, but did not
ache, and, though I would have liked to go out
and breathe some fresh air—for neither by door
nor window did the harness-room give upon the
outside of the castle—I felt very little the worse
for anything that had happened the night before.</p>

<p>Then Mansel and Hanbury appeared from the
kitchen hall, and I learned that Carson and Bell
were guarding the kitchen-quarters from the first
floor of the house. To command the courtyard was
simple, for this could be done from any window
that looked upon it: and, as luck would have it,
the South-West corner of the castle ran into a
staircase-turret, from which anyone approaching
the kitchen from the meadow side could be easily
shot down.</p>

<p>There was, of course, a very great deal to be
settled, but we had but to raise one issue to perceive
that its consideration was depending upon our
determination of another, and, by the time we had
breakfasted, we had done little but agree upon two
or three matters of fact.</p>

<p><span class="it">The innkeeper knew of the treasure and where it
lay.</span> How he had learned the secret, it was idle
to speculate: as like as not, he had held it for
years, but, because he would not share it except
with his two confederates, he had perforce been
content to let the treasure lie. How nearly we had
played into his hands was a disturbing thought.</p>

<p><span class="it">The thieves as good as knew where the treasure lay</span>:
and, in view of what had to be done to reach the
chamber, it seemed probable that they would press
the innkeeper into their service: knowing what
manner of men they were, the fellow would go
reluctantly.</p>

<p><span class="it">Our party, alone of the three, knew of the iron bars.</span>
This knowledge was of great value, for it showed
that any dash for the treasure was doomed to
failure, and that, even if we still had the well,
unless we could work undisturbed, our chances of
lifting the bags by way of the shaft would be almost
negligible. Mansel had watched the water, whilst
he was down in the well, and at the mouth of the
shaft it rose at the pace of at least thirty inches an
hour: and, since to cut through one bar would
take the best part of three hours, such a load of
labour, coming at the end of an exhausting day,
would be more than five men could carry, unless
they had each one the strength and endurance of
a giant. And that would mean posting but one
sentry, which was unthinkable.</p>

<p><span class="it">Even reinforced by the landlord, the thieves would
not labour as had we.</span> For one thing, they had
neither the physique nor the condition of body which
we enjoyed: for another, they were out of their
element. For all that, we hoped very much that
they would make an attempt to re-empty the well,
for that would keep them occupied and leave us
more or less free to go about our business of finding
another way. For that, if we were not to abandon
the enterprise, we must clearly do.</p>

<p>And here we stepped into a very slough of
difficulty: for, without the enemy’s knowledge, to
drive a new shaft to the chamber was demanding
the cunning of an Odysseus, and how, in the face
of such aggression as we had met the night before,
we were at once to prosecute such travail, hold the
stables and maintain our supplies was a question
which not one of us could pretend to answer. And
yet, as luck would have it, thanks to George
Hanbury’s most intelligent observation, this
Gordian knot was unloosed within the hour.</p>

<hr />

<p>When we had breakfasted, Mansel desired
Hanbury to relieve Carson, and me to take Bell’s
place, so that the two could come down and get
some food, and it was half an hour later, when
Bell had returned to the post which commanded
the courtyard, that Hanbury asked Mansel and
me to come to the staircase-turret, where Carson
was keeping watch.</p>

<p>Admission to the turret was gained from a
secondary hall, which cut the servants’ quarters
from the rest of the house: like the kitchen and the
servants’ hall, the turret had plainly survived, when
the rest of the castle was burned, for it was manifestly
aged and most solidly built: I imagine that of
late years it had served as a back staircase to the
mansion, for there was no other, and modern oil
lamps were still hanging upon its walls; but it was
a dark, break-neck place, and the servants that had
to use it must have complained bitterly. The stair
was winding and two feet six inches in width: the
rises of the steps were high, and their treads at
their broadest point were none too broad: the latter
were, of course, wedge-shaped and tapered to nothing.
There was, however, good handhold in the shape of
a fine, deep groove cut in the outer wall and running
up with the stairs. Walls, steps and all were smooth
and had once shown a high polish, seldom found
upon stone.</p>

<p>All this Hanbury showed us by the light of a
torch.</p>

<p>“And now,” said he, “here is a curious thing.”</p>

<p>With that, he began to descend—for we had gone
slowly up—and, when we were all but down, showed
us a little landing, which we had scarcely observed,
in the midst of the stair.</p>

<p>There were but two steps below it, between it
and the hall: and the landing curved, as did the
steps it served.</p>

<p>“But for this landing,” said George, “the stairs
would not be so steep. It’s hardly a landing:
it’s really the third stair up—with a very broad
tread: about four feet in breadth. And the height
it has cost the staircase has been regained by
making inconveniently high the rises of the following
stairs.”</p>

<p>When he had pointed this out, it was quite
evident.</p>

<p>“And now,” he continued, “look at the hand-rail.”</p>

<p>Then he showed us that the hand-rail ceased
where the landing began, and began again at once
where the landing ceased.</p>

<p>“Finally,” said Hanbury, “look at this rise.”</p>

<p>With that, he stepped into the hall and lowered
the torch.</p>

<p>At the top of the third rise, that is to say, two
inches below the landing, were two little slots in
the stone.</p>

<p>“<span class="it">By Jove</span>,” cried Mansel. “<span class="it">An oubliette.</span>”</p>

<p>“An <span class="it">oubliette</span>,” said Hanbury. “The innkeeper
said there were no cellars, and I’ve no doubt he’s
right. But, if this isn’t Axel the Red’s superfluous-guest-chamber,
the next time I see him I’ll walk
right up to ‘Rose’ Noble and ask him the way to
go home.”</p>

<p>Then he showed us that the broad tread or landing
was composed of four stones, three of which were
slabs and could probably be withdrawn, as the lid
of a pencil-box: but the fourth was fixed. Each
was wedge-shaped, that is to say, it had the shape
of a step.</p>

<p>“And now imagine,” he concluded, “those three
slabs withdrawn. The guest is descending in the
dark. Suddenly he steps into space, and, when he
clutches at the hand-rail, <span class="it">the hand-rail is gone</span>.
What sort of a fall he has <span class="it">remains to be seen</span>.”</p>

<p>Without a word, Mansel turned and left us, to
seek some implements, while I went down on my
knees and put my two forefingers into the slots.
These led into two holes, cut in the broad tread, and,
so soon as I felt them, I had no longer any doubt
that Hanbury’s conclusion was no fancy, but a
substantial truth.</p>

<p>And so it proved.</p>

<p>Mansel returned with a sponge, and was
quickly followed by Rowley, bearing some tools
and cord.</p>

<p>So soon as the landing was cleansed, it was easy
to discern the joints and even the scratches, made
upon the wall of the turret when the slabs had been
withdrawn.</p>

<p>These marks were slightly higher than we should
have expected to see them: but Mansel said that
that showed that, before we could draw it out, we
must somehow raise the edge of the first slab, for
no doubt there was a fillet below, which held it locked
into place.</p>

<p>In this he was right, and, but for his wit, we might
have sought to withdraw the slab for forty days in
vain: but, when we had raised it no more than
an eighth of an inch, by means of a wedge, it
yielded at once to our efforts and came directly
away without any fuss.</p>

<p>Here let me say that the workmanship expended
upon this devilish contrivance deserved a worthier
theme, for the trap was most beautifully made.
Each slab was recessed upon one of its edges, flanged
on the other and mitred on either side, and each
lay so snug against its fellow, the turret wall and the
spindle round which the staircase curled, that, as
Mansel said at the time, “only a brilliant observation
would have seen anything at all in the landing but
clumsiness of construction.”</p>

<p>We had now before us a hole, admitting to some
dark place, so Mansel went off to recover and mend
the search-light, while Hanbury, Rowley and I
withdrew the remaining slabs. When these had
been displaced, the hole revealed was some three and
a half feet long: and of all the unfortunates who
ever stepped into that space I cannot think one was
saved; for, as I have said already, there was there
no hand-rail, the stonework around was polished,
and the sides of the trap were mitred, so that even
the chances of an ape that had once lost its balance
there would have been small indeed.</p>

<p>The air that came from below smelt fairly fresh
and was not dank. But the darkness was impenetrable.</p>

<p>Presently Mansel returned, with the search-light in
working order, and, when we had made this fast,
we lowered it into the hole.</p>

<p>The first thing its beam revealed was the ‘bed’
upon which any victim of the trap must fall.</p>

<p>This was nothing less than a Cornish stile, that
is to say, six low, thin fences of stone, built parallel
and eighteen inches apart. As these were full
forty feet below the trap, that anyone, falling upon
them from the staircase, could fail to be broken in
pieces was unthinkable. The very look of them
shocked us, for it was terrible to regard preparation
so nice, deliberate and permanent to send a fellow
creature to meet his God.</p>

<p>Presently Hanbury spoke.</p>

<p>“Let me go down,” he said. “I’m not afraid of
ghosts.”</p>

<p>“I’ll come with you,” said I. “It’s a two-men
job.”</p>

<p>When Mansel had brought the search-light, he had
brought a rope also, as well as the measuring-line.
But he had not brought the seat which we had used
in the well; so Rowley was sent for this and for a
loose cushion, which we could use as a pad between
the rope and the stone.</p>

<p>While he was gone, Mansel kept snuffing the air
and, after a little, announced that the <span class="it">oubliette</span> had
some opening we could not see.</p>

<p>“I can feel no draught,” he said, “but I’ll swear
that this air is fresh. And that’s as it should be.
It was sometimes advisable to empty an <span class="it">oubliette</span>, but
to use the trap for that purpose would have been
inconvenient. There was, therefore, a second
entrance.” He stopped there to clap Hanbury on
the back. “If I am right,” he continued, “and
such an entrance exists <span class="it">on the northern or river side</span>—well,
if George Hanbury likes to demand two thirds
of the treasure as his share, I don’t believe we can
fairly dispute his claim.”</p>

<p>Though I had not Mansel’s foresight, I heartily
agreed, for, if we had air to breathe the dungeon
was plainly the place from which to drive our shaft,
and, though a vent-hole would conduct the sound of
our labour, provided it gave upon the river, there
would be no one to hear.</p>

<p>Then Rowley returned with the seat and the
loose cushion, and, without more ado, Hanbury was
lowered into the <span class="it">oubliette</span>. When he was down, I
followed, full of instructions from Mansel to walk
delicately and, above all things, not to give tongue,
“for,” said he, “there is never any mistaking a
voice which comes from under ground, and, if, as
I think, we have found the clue to our labyrinth, it
would be a thousand pities to put the enemy wise.”</p>

<p>The dungeon was some thirty feet square and
roughly walled with stones, laid in cement. The
weight of the turret was taken by three tremendous
piers, between two of which lay the stile: this
hideous thing was built of clean-cut stone, with a
low wall at either end to hold the fences in place.
The piers and the stile stood in a corner of the
dungeon and took up much of its room. The place
did not seem very damp, but was chill and smelt of
the earth. So far as we could see, the walls were
everywhere sound.</p>

<p>All this I observed with difficulty, for Hanbury
had found a doorway, before I was down, and would
scarcely permit me to look around for impatience
to see whither the postern led.</p>

<p>The doorway was barred by an old, iron gate,
with a great clumsy lock, whose tongues, when shot,
protruded into the stone jamb: but, though the
gate was closed, it was not locked—an old negligence,
I suppose, of some varlet which the Count himself
might have pardoned, since the dead cannot open
gates whether they be fastened or no.</p>

<p>The doorway admitted to a passage some five feet
wide. This began at once to descend: there were
no steps, but a very steep, smooth incline, upon
which, such was its angle, it would have been easy
to fall: but some old, iron dogs, cemented at regular
intervals into the walls, afforded handhold.</p>

<p>We descended gingerly: Hanbury went first, and
I came behind him, with the lamp in my hand.</p>

<p>We had gone, it seemed, a long way, when the
passage ran suddenly into another chamber, not so
big as the first and, though lofty, not nearly so high.
Its longer wall—for it was rectangular—was before
us and contained three deep embrasures, the slits
of which were rudely blocked with timbers, which
were barred, like shutters, into place. That these
windows looked out upon the world was evident,
for, so soon as we masked the search-light, little
streaks of daylight were appearing from all three.
And from them, of course, came the air which had
kept the great dungeon fresh.</p>

<p>At first it seemed that this was as far as we could
go, but, after a little, we found a loose slab in a corner,
close to the window wall. This was round, like a
cellar-plate, and might have sealed the mouth of
a cistern, for a bar had been sunk in its middle,
by which a strong man could lift it out of its place.</p>

<p>We were by now quite sure that we were in a
gallery which had been cut out of the cliff and that,
when the shutters were down, we should see the
river below us and the road on its farther side: but,
though to my mind it did not matter—for, by the
embrasures, we could have plenty of air—the slab
did not look to me as though it was concealing an
entrance, because, for one thing, it was round and,
for another, too small to be hiding a flight of steps.
And here I was at once right and wrong, for, when I
had lifted it aside, the daylight showed us no
entrance, but an exit as clean and simple as ever
I saw. This was plainly a shoot, big enough to
let a man’s body, and leading at a very steep angle
directly to the river below. It was round and
smooth, like a drain, and about a third of its mouth
was under water.</p>

<p>We discovered later that the shoot in fact discharged
into a deep pool: and I think there is little
doubt that the bodies of those who had died upon
the stile in the <span class="it">oubliette</span> were afterwards disposed
of in this way: for a corpse had but to be loaded,
head and foot, and then shot into the pool, to sink
into well-nigh impregnable oblivion.</p>

<p>That the passage by which we had come was little
more than a ramp, down which to drag a body was
child’s play, I think supports this view: but we
never could make up our minds upon the purpose
which the gallery or second chamber had been constructed
to serve. It may have been a dungeon:
it may have been merely the dreadful ‘robing-room’
in which the dead were ‘attired’ for their
last journey: it may have been a retreat to which
the Count could withdraw, if the castle fell, where
he could rest for a while before he made his escape.
Be that as it may, so far as we were concerned, it
was a perfect withdrawing-room, airy, secluded,
safe, and actually adjoining the dungeon from
which we must drive our shaft.</p>

<p>And that was as far as I could see.</p>

<p>Then we returned to the dungeon, and Hanbury
ascended, and Mansel came down in his stead. I
showed him all we had found. When we came to
the shoot, he laughed.</p>

<p>“We’re doomed to get wet,” he said.</p>

<p>I did not understand, and said so.</p>

<p>Mansel fingered his chin.</p>

<p>“William,” he said, “that bomb put the wind
up us properly. So much so that this very night we
leave Wagensburg—bag, baggage and cars—never
to return. At least, that, I trust, is what ‘Rose’
Noble will think. Of course, he’s no fool, ‘Rose’
Noble. But, if we leave the stable doors open,
he’ll have something to go on, won’t he? And I
think we might call at the inn, to say ‘Good-bye’
to the landlord. That would be almost artistic.”</p>

<p>I could only stare.</p>

<p>Mansel laughed. Then he waved a hand at the
chamber.</p>

<p>“Dormitory and parlour,” he said, “until the
treasure is won. The cars stabled at Villach:
supplies delivered by night, by means of the shoot.
And, when we’re through, what an exit! Simple,
unobtrusive and swift. All we need is a boat.
Of course, George Hanbury should receive the
D.S.O. And I think perhaps Axel the Red deserves a
‘mention.’ ”</p>

<hr />

<p>By noon we had lowered into the <span class="it">oubliette</span> everything
loose that we had, except, of course, some
arms and the furniture of the cars. Then Mansel
and Carson descended, to arrange the electric
light and install a muffled bell which should ring
from the mouth of the shoot.</p>

<p>By lunch-time all was in order, and we had but
to lay our plans.</p>

<p>These were easy to make.</p>

<p>We soon decided to leave Rowley and Bell
behind in the <span class="it">oubliette</span>, while the rest of us took the
cars and left for Villach. To procure a good base
should be easy; but we might have to go to Salzburg
to find a collapsible boat. It seemed likely that we
should be back by the following night. But,
before we left the castle, there remained to be done
two things of some importance. The first was to
see, if we could, what action the enemy was taking:
and the second, <span class="it">to determine, once for all, the direction
in which to dig our shaft</span>.</p>

<p>Now, when I perceived the gravity of this decision,
the extreme difficulty of taking it and the
impossibility of verifying its accuracy, I must
honestly confess that my heart failed me. Had we
had the estate to ourselves, to drive a tunnel near
two hundred yards in length and twenty-five feet
below ground, so as to hit a chamber some six feet
square, would to my mind, have been a very
difficult feat: but to accomplish this without being
able so much as to survey, with this idea, the
surface beneath which we were to burrow, without
one definite measurement upon which to found our
endeavour, would be, I felt, to perform a miracle.</p>

<p>Indeed, I said as much; to find, to my relief,
that we were not so ill-equipped as I had imagined:
for it appeared that, the evening before, whilst I
was in the well, Mansel had pulled out a compass
and taken a bearing by which he had determined
the angle at which the shaft left the well. “And
that,” said he, “is the kernel of the knowledge we
need. The rest I will get, if not to-day, to-morrow:
and, if not to-morrow, the next day. There’s,
therefore, no cause for concern. Finally, we have
yet to reconnoitre: and if we can wring a survey
out of a reconnaissance, so much the better.”</p>

<p>Such comfortable words, coming from Mansel,
went far to rout my misgivings, but I could not
help hoping very hard that some sort of survey would
be made possible by the enemy’s absence from the
well, and at once proposed that I should go up to
the roof, and, taking care to keep out of sight, see
if I could perceive any sign of activity. To this
suggestion Mansel agreed, and within five minutes
I was upon the slates, looking towards the great
well.</p>

<p>I could not see the meadow for the bushes and
trees, but work of some sort was proceeding about
the well, for, though there was no sound of the
windlass, I heard repeatedly the smack of stone
upon stone, and once the loose clatter of stones
being shot on to the ground. These sounds I could
not interpret, and, since I could hear nothing else
and could see nowhere any movement, I presently
descended to the hall and made my report.</p>

<p>That the thieves were drawing no water delighted
us all, for nothing could have shown us more plainly
how much they were underrating the activity of
the springs. Moreover, by their failure to bale,
they were throwing away the precious fruit of our
labour, and, of their ignorance, letting slip an
invaluable advantage. When we had first taken
possession, some fifty-five feet of water had covered
the mouth of the shaft: at daybreak this morning
it was hidden by, at the most, nineteen: but, if
they did not begin baling before dawn on the
following day, the water would by then have
regained almost the whole of the ground we had
been at such pains to capture.</p>

<p>“Which shows,” said Hanbury, “that the
innkeeper isn’t with them. If he were, he’d have
put them wise.”</p>

<p>“Don’t be too sure,” said Mansel. “It’s a
hundred to one they wouldn’t take his advice:
but what is still more likely, is that he’ll hold his
tongue. He doesn’t want to help ‘Rose’ Noble
to the treasure. What would be his reward?
Why, as like as not, they’d leave him down in the
well. He knows that perfectly. And that’s why
I very much hope they have impressed him. It
will keep him out of mischief, and the quality of
help he’ll give them will do as much harm as good.”</p>

<p>It was then arranged that he and I and Carson
should go out on patrol, while Rowley watched the
courtyard, and Hanbury and Bell covered our
advance from the other side of the house.</p>

<p>Carson was to start from the courtyard, pass
through the great gateway and move towards the
meadow, with the path on his left: Mansel and I
were to start from the West of the mansion: and
we were to meet, if we could, in a dip which lay
between the meadow and the trees which sheltered
the house.</p>

<p>Before we set out, we closed the mouth of the
dungeon. Then we took a pistol apiece: and
Mansel put in his pocket a compass and a measuring-tape.</p>

<p>“And please remember,” he said, “we’re not
out to fight: we’re going to see what’s afoot and
to mark the lie of the land: a fuss, therefore,
means failure: if there’s anyone in our way we
must wait till he moves: he’s sure to do that
before sundown, and it’s only just two. And
there’s the slogan for to-day: ‘Take your time.’ ”</p>

<p>Mansel and I could only emerge from a window
upon the first floor, for all those below were barred:
but we had a short rope-ladder, which we had not
yet tried. This certainly served our purpose, but
it was the most awkward appliance I ever have
used, for its rungs were of rope and gave way
beneath my weight in a most disconcerting manner.</p>

<p>When we were down, Hanbury drew up the
ladder, leaving only a little grey cord to hang
against the wall, some seven feet above ground.
We had but to twitch this to bring down the ladder
at once; so, though it was very improbable that
an unfriendly eye would perceive anything suspicious,
our means of ascent was continually assured.</p>

<p>The first thing we did was to gain the shelter
of the trees and lie down in the long grass. There
we lay for ten minutes as still as death. During
all that time we heard not the faintest sound,
except, very indistinctly, the stony chink and
clatter which I had heard from the roof.</p>

<p>At length Mansel gave the signal, and we began
to move.</p>

<p>Using the greatest caution, we crawled South,
keeping as close to the castle as the covert allowed.
So we came to the corner where the staircase-turret
stood. Here, again, we lay still for ten minutes
or more. Then Mansel rose to his knees, and
from his knees to his feet. For a moment he stood
like a statue: then he looked slowly around. The
next instant he was at the base of the turret,
measuring-tape in hand.</p>

<p>I do not think that anything I ever saw Mansel
do impressed me so much as the little survey he
made at the foot of the castle wall. He was full
in the open, and against the white, sunlit stone he
offered a perfect mark: the work he was doing, if
seen, would as good as betray our plans: his
nearest cover was twenty-five paces away. Yet,
though he worked for six minutes, he never once
looked about him or even raised his head. Swiftly
and silently he used the compass and tape, going
about his business with the deliberate precision of
one to whom time is no object, and entering figures
in a note-book, as though he had the world to
himself.</p>

<p>When he had quite finished, he took a long nail
from his pocket and, placing its point where he had
made a slight mark, pressed it well into the ground:
then he hooked the end of the tape upon the head
of the nail, and stepped across to where I lay in
the grass.</p>

<p>“Kneel for a minute,” he said. I knelt. “You
see that fir to our left, with the broken bough like
a spout? I’m going to measure exactly how far
it stands from the nail. Follow me, with the tape
in your hand. Hold it continually taut, so that
whatever happens it doesn’t slip off the nail.”</p>

<p>With that, he lay down in the grass and began
to steal forward, paying out the tape as he went.</p>

<p>We had crawled and lain still and crawled again
for nearly half-an-hour, and, so much were my
fingers aching, I was beginning to wish the treasure
at the bottom of the sea, when Mansel turned his
head and signed to me to come alongside.</p>

<p>I did so gingerly.</p>

<p>“I can smell tobacco,” he breathed.</p>

<p>We were still ten paces from the fir, to which,
except for the bushes, we had had a clear run: in
threading the tape through these, Mansel had
shown infinite patience, for, as may be readily
understood, it was a trying exercise, and to perform
it noiselessly had entailed a lot of finical labour.</p>

<p>At first I could smell no smoke, but after a
moment or two a whiff came to my nose, and I was
immediately sure that it came from the South. I
told Mansel this, whereupon he at once went forward,
bidding me stay where I was. Half a length
clear of me he stopped, and, after a long wait,
signed to me to come on. When I had done so
and was lying alongside, he told me very gently
to part the grass.</p>

<p>The first thing I saw was that we were at the
end of the covert through which we had crawled
and that the fir stood clear, on the edge of the
little dip where we were to join Carson. Beyond
lay the meadow. In this, twenty paces away, stood
a little, curved breastwork composed of flat, loose
stones such as go to the making of piled walls, and
built to shelter a sentry from every side but the
South. This little sconce was occupied, for the
smoke we had smelt was floating over its parapet,
and the crown of a soft, felt hat was just to be
seen. Whoever was there was plainly taking his
ease and was sitting down on the ground, with his
back to the wall.</p>

<p>In the distance, about the well, ‘Rose’ Noble
was directing the building of a kind of redoubt, in
the shape of a wall of flat stones piled one upon
the other and packed together with earth. These
were brought up from the combe, from some wall
or cabin, I suppose, which we had not observed,
and were borne on a sort of hurdle by a bearer at
either end. The sun was hot, and I did not envy
them their labour; and, indeed, it was very clear
that they did not like it themselves, for they
staggered under their loads, like drunken men, and
finally discharged them with the slovenly recklessness
of one who is past caring.</p>

<p>Some sort of system was observed, for the two
that had brought up the stones packed those they
had brought into place, while the others reluctantly
descended in search of more: but, partly for want
of stones and partly because of the laziness of its
builders, which was quite laughable to watch, the
wall rose very slowly, and I was not surprised to
see ‘Rose’ Noble fiercely impatient of such half-heartedness.
What he said I could not hear, but
the contempt and indignation of his gestures were
unmistakable.</p>

<p>Perhaps, for us, the most engaging sight was
that of the landlord of the inn, his wrist fastened
by a cord to that of Punter, taking his turn with
the latter of bringing up stones on the hurdle and
packing them into place. A more dejected-looking
workman I never have seen, and I imagine he was
cursing the treasure and the well and Wagensburg
from the bottom of his heart.</p>

<p>No one of them was suitably attired for manual
labour, but Job was wearing a pair of white flannel
trousers, which might have afforded him comfort,
had he not been so anxious to keep them clean.
In this the labour was against him, and his manifest
concern for their condition was constantly provoking
‘Rose’ Noble’s wrath.</p>

<p>Ellis was not to be seen, which satisfied us that
he was behind the breastwork, performing the
duties of a sentinel according to his lights.</p>

<p>Now, all this encouraged me greatly, and, I
fancy, Mansel as well; for it was plain as a pikestaff
that, though the thieves ‘meant business,’ when
they felt the pinch of labour there was only one
man among them worth his salt, and that, if they
could not draw water any better than they could
build walls, their chances of reaching the shaft were
slight indeed, to say nothing of Ellis’ exhibition,
for which he deserved to be shot. All the same,
there were still six paces between us and the fir,
which was our immediate goal, and these lay in
view of the meadow and all its occupants.</p>

<p>Now this, though I did not then know it, did
not matter at all, for what Mansel had wanted to
do was to reach some point from which he could
see the well. And this we had done. So, after a
little, he brought out a second nail and pressed it
into the ground. The distance between the two
nails was eighty-one yards. He then took the
bearing of the well from the second nail. When
he had done this, for an hour he lay very still, like
a dog, with his eyes fixed upon the meadow and his
chin on his hands. He told me later that during
that time he endured the torment of a thief who,
holding already some earring of very great value,
regards its fellow from without some jeweller’s shop;
for that, having got so far, not to be able to measure
the distance from where we lay to the well was
exasperating indeed.</p>

<p>At last he whispered to me to move a few paces
back towards the house and to wait for him in a
place where the cover was thick.</p>

<p>I had hardly done so before I saw Carson’s head
a little way to our left, and, so soon as he saw
that I saw him, he nodded and disappeared.</p>

<p>As soon as Mansel was back, he spoke in
my ear.</p>

<p>“I think we must make a bid for the distance
from the covert to the well. We may not need it;
but, if we don’t take it now, I don’t think we shall
be able to take it at all. Unless I’m mistaken,
they’re not only building a shelter: <span class="it">they’re building
their future home</span>: and the idea of surveying even
the curtilage of ‘Rose’ Noble’s bower, when
occupied, makes no appeal to me. Now to drive
them out of the meadow would be of no use: they’d
certainly run for shelter, but, as soon as they’d
won it, they’d stand; and then, though they might
not hurt us, they’d see us at work. And that
would be fatal. The only thing to be done is to
draw them into the combe. Please, therefore, go
back and get Hanbury. Leave the house together
and see that Bell or Rowley pulls up the ladder
out of sight. Then make your way to the combe,
bearing West, well away from the meadow, beyond
the sentinel peak. Locate their depot of stones
and try to pick up their car. Then decide two
things—first, what feint is most likely to draw
them into the combe, and, secondly, how you and
Hanbury are going to retire on the house. When
you’ve taken these two decisions, await a convenient
moment, and then demonstrate. Fire, start the
engine of the car, shout—according as you think
best. If you can do it, I should think the car is a
sure draw. And the moment you’ve got them
going, fade right away. For heaven’s sake take
no risks: it isn’t worth it. And a minute and a
half is enough for Carson and me. Now, is all
that clear?”</p>

<p>I nodded.</p>

<p>“Good,” breathed Mansel. “As you go, please
release the tape and pocket the nail: and remember,
<span class="it">take your time</span>.”</p>

<p>“I will,” I said.</p>

<p>Then I turned and left him, and started to crawl
back towards the house.</p>

<p>It was, I suppose, some thirty minutes later that
Hanbury and I rounded the south-western shoulder
of the sentinel peak to see the closed car below us
on a grass-grown track, close to a ruinous byre.
Of this the walls were standing, and had been
rudely loop-holed: but the roof was gone. Still,
the place made a good block-house, and the ground
about it was clear, affording a field of fire. The
track was wet and muddy, because of all the water
which we had drawn from the well: and, further
East, the ground to the North of the track had the
look of a bog. Two or three blankets were lying
spread out in the sun, and bottles and papers and
tins made a disorderly litter about the spot. A door
of the car was open, and on this hung somebody’s
coat: a couple of empty glasses stood on the
running-board.</p>

<p>We had just observed all this when Punter and
the innkeeper came plodding into view, the latter
dragging the hurdle, as though he were tired of
life. Arrived at the byre, Punter lay down on the
ground, while the other began to pluck some stones
from what was left of a pen by the side of the byre.
He worked slowly enough in all conscience, yet
too fast, I suppose, for Punter, for, when the hurdle
was laden, the latter stared upon its burden and
then, as though the sight shocked him, covered
his eyes and lay back upon the ground. Indeed,
so ludicrous was his demeanour that Hanbury and
I began to shake with laughter, and, when his
unfortunate companion began to gesticulate in
manifest apprehension of the trouncing this delay
would provoke, we could have roared with mirth.
Punter, however, took no notice at all, and at
last the other sat down and put his head in his
hands.</p>

<p>Before they moved again, our plans were laid.</p>

<p>From what we remembered of the combe, there
would come a moment when Punter, mounting the
slope, could see ‘Rose’ Noble, yet have the car
in his eye. At that moment we were to sally
upon the car. I was to start her engine and, as
though by accident, sound the electric horn, while
Hanbury was to attack her petrol-tank. Directly
we heard the cries sure to be raised, we were to fire
at random, and I was to run up the track and
Hanbury down. Once out of sight we were to take
to the woods and make our way back to the castle,
I by way of the shrine and Hanbury, who was
fleeter of foot, by the line we had come.</p>

<p>The plan was simple enough, and, I think, sound:
in fact, as I shall presently show, it served
its purpose: but this it did at a price which we did
not expect to pay, for I had just started the engine,
after sounding the horn, and was watching Punter’s
frenzy upon the brow of the rise, when two hands
closed upon my windpipe with a grip so savage
that I was unable to breathe, much less utter a sound.
Be sure I fought like a madman, but the man
behind me was strong and had the advantage.
His thumbs were braced against the back of my
neck, which might have been in a vice, and, having
once got such a hold, for him to prevent me from
leaving the driver’s seat was very easy. It seemed
a long time before I heard cries raised, and then
the noise of a shot. This sounded faint, and
blurred, for the blood was pounding in my head,
and I knew I was losing consciousness. Then I
heard more cries, which seemed confused and
distant, and I was still trying to determine what
they might mean, when my senses left me.</p>

<hr />

<p>“What do you know?” said ‘Rose’ Noble.</p>

<p>I was sitting up on the ground, with my back to
the near fore wheel of the closed car. The hub-cap
was hurting abominably, but about this I could
do nothing, because I was lashed to the spokes and
could not move. ‘Rose’ Noble was sitting on a
box a few feet away, and, immediately opposite
me, Ellis was leaning against the jamb of a doorway,
framed by a high stone wall, with a cigar in his
mouth. For a moment or two I could not make
out where I was: then I saw that the car had been
moved to the farther side of the byre, which now
stood between it and the combe, and wholly concealed
it from anyone North of the track.</p>

<p>I must have lain unconscious a long time, for
the sun had just gone down.</p>

<p>“What do you know?” said ‘Rose’ Noble.</p>

<p>“I refuse to talk,” said I, “until you loosen this
cord. I expect to be tied up, but this hub-cap is
breaking my back.”</p>

<p>Ellis laughed and spat, but ‘Rose’ Noble only
regarded me, rubbing his nose. Then, to my
surprise, he rose and, coming behind me, began to
loosen my bonds. Ellis’ surprise was plainly
greater than mine, for, when he saw ‘Rose’
Noble’s purpose, he started forward with an oath,
and dropped his cigar.</p>

<p>“What the devil are you doing?” he cried.</p>

<p>The other told him not to be a fool.</p>

<p>When the strain was gone, I thanked him, and he
made fast the cords.</p>

<p>“And now,” he said, resuming his seat on the
box, “what do you know?”</p>

<p>“I believe,” said I, “there’s a chamber at the
bottom of that well.”</p>

<p>“How far down?” said ‘Rose’ Noble.</p>

<p>“Most of the way,” said I. “I can’t tell you
for certain, because there was still too much water
when last I went down: but I think it lies pretty
low.”</p>

<p>“Were you the last to go down?”</p>

<p>“I was.”</p>

<p>“Can you speak German?” said ‘Rose’
Noble.</p>

<p>“Not a word.”</p>

<p>I knew what was in his mind, and was glad to
make a true answer, for to lie when your statement
cannot be checked is one thing, but to give a reply
which another captive may instantly show to be
false is another matter.</p>

<p>“When you say ‘a chamber’,” said ‘Rose’
Noble, “what do you mean?”</p>

<p>I told him of the well-digger’s statement, only
omitting to speak any word of the shaft.</p>

<p>“Then the treasure’s under water?” he said.</p>

<p>“It must be,” said I. “In some recess in the
wall.”</p>

<p>“How far down did you get?”</p>

<p>“About forty feet below high-water mark.”</p>

<p>“That tells me nothing,” said ‘Rose’ Noble.
“How close did you get to the bottom of the well?”</p>

<p>“Within twenty-five feet.”</p>

<p>The man’s bearing was curiously soft: he was
certainly examining me, but his manner was not
unpleasant, though something abrupt: all the
time he kept his eyes on my face, tilting his chin
a little and blinking musingly.</p>

<p>“And now,” he said, looking away, “what are
your plans?”</p>

<p>“At the present moment,” said I, “we have
no plans.”</p>

<p>For a moment ‘Rose’ Noble did not move.
Then he looked round and upon me, with his eyes
wide.</p>

<p>I have tried before to describe the horror these
lent his countenance, but I do not think I can ever
begin to convey the appalling malevolence of his
terrible gaze. It was not human: and, as I met
it, I felt my hair rise upon my head.</p>

<p>“Guess again,” he purred.</p>

<p>I made him no answer, partly because I dared
not trust my voice.</p>

<p>“Mansel,” continued ‘Rose’ Noble, “sent you
two guys down here, to draw us away from the well.
<span class="it">Why?</span>”</p>

<p>I was so much confounded by the man’s discernment
that, instead of directly traversing what can
only have been a conjecture, dressed up as a fact,
I said nothing at all, but only stared upon him like
a man in a dream.</p>

<p>“<span class="it">Why?</span>”</p>

<p>I swallowed with difficulty.</p>

<p>“Mansel doesn’t talk,” I said hoarsely, “even to
me. I know he wanted to have a look at the well,
but he didn’t say why.”</p>

<p>The eyes seemed to scorch my brain.</p>

<p>“<span class="it">Why, d’you think?</span>”</p>

<p>I could only shake my head.</p>

<p>“He’s lying,” said Ellis. “He knows.”</p>

<p>“Yes,” said ‘Rose’ Noble. “He knows.”
He raised his voice. “Bunch!” The driver of
the car appeared. “Take off the fan-strap.”</p>

<p>I suppose I might have known what was coming,
but not until the belt had been taken from the
cooling-fan it controlled and I had been spread-eagled,
with my back flat against the radiator of
the car, did I realise that pressure in the shape
of heat, was to be put upon me to open my mouth.
I had but a shirt to my back, and I could feel that
the radiator was just warm.</p>

<p>“Start her up,” said ‘Rose’ Noble.</p>

<p>Bunch started the engine: then he played
with the throttle, until she was ‘idling’ in a
leisurely way.</p>

<p>‘Rose’ Noble got to his feet.</p>

<p>“I am not in the habit,” he said, “of wasting
my time. I shall, therefore, require your answer
<span class="it">before</span> you are taken down. Bear that in mind.
<span class="it">Before.</span> So don’t wait too long before announcing
your readiness to reply. Leave, so to speak, a
margin of endurance.”</p>

<p>The cold, imperious tone stung me to speech.</p>

<p>“That’s not the way,” said I, “to address your
betters.”</p>

<p>Ellis, who was moving away, stopped in his
stride and turned: Bunch, who was fastening a
bootlace, looked up at me, open-mouthed: ‘Rose’
Noble stood very still.</p>

<p>At length:</p>

<p>“That was a mistake,” he said slowly, “which
Mansel would never have made.”</p>

<p>“Very likely,” said I, for I saw I had drawn
blood, and this exhilarated me. “But then, he’s
enough brain for five. And isn’t he quick with
his hands?”</p>

<p>‘Rose’ Noble lifted his head and looked at the
sky. This was dark with clouds, coming up from
the West.</p>

<p>“After all,” he said, as though in soliloquy,
“swans sing, don’t they? So why not a cygnet?”</p>

<p>Then he turned and walked firmly away, passing
out of sight round the byre: Ellis followed him:
and presently ‘Rose’ Noble’s voice called Bunch,
and I was left alone.</p>

<p>It was more than half dark now, and already
the radiator was growing unpleasantly warm. I
attempted to hollow my back, but I was lashed so
tight that I could only spare one region at the
expense of another. I, therefore, began an
endeavour to stretch the cords: unless I could
do this quickly, I should not be able, I knew, to
do it at all, for to brace myself against the radiator
would soon be out of the question. I, therefore,
like Samson, put forth all my strength, taking the
strain for a quarter of a minute at a time, with the
happy result that, after three or four efforts, though
the cords held, I must have added full half an inch
to their length, for I was able to stand quite clear
of the now fiery metal. This was a great relief,
but I knew that, unless I was soon to be saved, I
had but postponed my torment.</p>

<p>I have often wondered why I did not lose heart,
for my plight was really desperate, and my rescue
could only follow the very capture of the byre:
but, I suppose, a merciful Providence heartens
those who else would have no hope at all, so that
they may not be called upon to bear too great a
burden. So I stood there hopefully, with my eyes
on the corner of the byre, listening for any sound.</p>

<p>Suddenly a shot rang out.</p>

<p>Ellis was the first to appear, whipping into
safety, like the dastard he was: ‘Rose’ Noble
and Bunch followed hastily enough. They all
passed into the byre without a word.</p>

<p>After a moment or two:</p>

<p>“That was Job’s side,” said Ellis. “Why doesn’t
the —— come in?”</p>

<p>“Because he’s asleep,” sneered ‘Rose’ Noble.
“That’s the only thing that would keep Job at
his post.”</p>

<p>Then I heard two more shots, and almost at
once Bunch cried:</p>

<p>“There he is by the rotten stump. I can see
his pants.”</p>

<p>Here came another shot, and those in the byre
cried out that Job was down.</p>

<p>“Serve him right,” said ‘Rose’ Noble,
“for showing them where to shoot. This isn’t
Wimbledon.”</p>

<p>“He’s up,” cried Bunch. “He’s up. Punched,
though. Lame as a —— tree.”</p>

<p>“What did I say?” said ‘Rose’ Noble. And
then, with a dirty oath, “He’d be something more
than lame if I’d been behind him.”</p>

<p>Here came the scuttle of feet, and Punter rounded
the byre and flashed within.</p>

<p>“Job’s stopped one,” he cried, panting.</p>

<p>“You must teach him to run,” said ‘Rose’
Noble, acidly. “Take the right wall.”</p>

<p>“Curse this dark,” said Ellis. “I can’t see a
—— thing.”</p>

<p>“There’s nothing to see,” said ‘Rose’ Noble.
“We’ve only got to sit tight an’——”</p>

<p>“He’s down again,” cried Bunch. “Crawlin’ in.”</p>

<p>“Oh, —— Job,” said ‘Rose’ Noble. “Crawling
or lying, what the hell do we care? Time to——”</p>

<p>A little burst of fire drowned what else he was
saying, and I heard a bullet strike upon stone, and
another sing over my head.</p>

<p>“Three flashes in front,” said ‘Rose’ Noble.
“Now for the other two.”</p>

<p>As though in reply came two shots, not far away.</p>

<p>“Five,” said ‘Rose’ Noble. “Thank you,
you clumsy fools. Ellis, they’re under that hump,
trying to move around. Keep your eye on the track:
they can’t cross that unseen. Bunch, take the left
with Ellis and watch that road.”</p>

<p>“Job coming up, Punter,” said Bunch.
“Don’——”</p>

<p>The profane unanimity with which his companions
consigned poor Job and all his works to the devil
argued that they had slight use for a wounded man.
Had it been Ellis or ‘Rose’ Noble, I do not think
the others would have been any more concerned;
for they were confederates of necessity, and not at
all of choice.</p>

<p>There was another spurt of shots.</p>

<p>“Three from the hump,” said Ellis. “An’ they
don’t fancy that road.”</p>

<p>“Show you can see it,” said ‘Rose’ Noble,
“just to encourage the swine.”</p>

<p>As Ellis fired, Job crawled round the edge of the
byre into my view, trailing his left leg. When he
was round, he stopped short of the doorway, as
though he had done enough. After a little, he
propped himself on an elbow and looked about
him.</p>

<p>The firing was hotter now, and, once and again,
Ellis fired down the road. He or ‘Rose’ Noble
always counted the flashes in a loud voice.</p>

<p>Job had seen me and was plainly puzzled by my
attitude, for he craned his neck and peered, like a
dim-sighted man. But even this inspection did
not apparently satisfy his curiosity, for, after a
little, he fell again upon his face and started to
drag himself painfully almost up to my feet. There
he lay for a moment, as though the effort had been
too much for him. Then his arm stole out, and <span class="it">I
felt him cutting my bonds</span>.</p>

<p>“One flash from the right,” said ‘Rose’ Noble.
“Punter, watch your road.”</p>

<p>“Three from the hump,” said Ellis, and fired
again.</p>

<p>“Can you walk?” breathed Mansel.</p>

<p>“Yes,” said I, free and trembling.</p>

<p>“Follow me.”</p>

<p>He stepped out of sight of the doorway behind
the car, with me in his wake. Then he put his
hand under my arm, and we began to run. A
hundred yards later he stopped, to rip Job’s
trousers from his legs. Then we crossed the track
and headed straight for the combe. Half way up
this, Mansel drew his pistol and, standing with his
back to the byre, fired four shots in succession
into the air.</p>

<p>“That’s the rally,” he explained. “And now
you get back to the house. The courtyard door is
open. And you might give Tester some water and
tell him that I shall be back in a quarter of an
hour.”</p>

<hr />

<p>Mansel was as good as his word, and twenty-five
minutes later we were all six within doors.</p>

<p>If I had then expected to hear his tale, I was
disappointed, for Carson was sent forthwith to
prepare the cars, and Rowley and Bell made ready
to enter the <span class="it">oubliette</span>.</p>

<p>Bell was the older of the two, and Mansel put
him in charge.</p>

<p>“Move very carefully,” he said, “and make no
unnecessary noise. During the day you may take
down one of the shutters and open the shoot. You
may do the same by night, provided you show no
light. If I don’t come to-morrow night, I shall
come the next night without fail: but not, of course,
during the day. The bell from the shoot is muffled,
so sleep with it to your ear; and test it at dusk.”</p>

<p>Then we lowered them into the dungeon, and,
when they had found the search-light, we slid the
slabs back into place. Mansel oversaw this action,
himself wiping every edge with great particularity:
and, when it was done, he took a handful of dust,
which he had got from some chamber, and sprinkled
it over the landing from side to side. Then he
took a cloth and smeared the dust to and fro, finally
wiping it off into an empty tin. When he had done
this, not a joint was visible.</p>

<p>Much of the ceiling of the hall which led to the
turret had been brought down by the bomb, and
the powder had floated up the staircase and settled
on every tread. That we had been busy hereabouts
was, therefore, most evident, for the stairs were
covered with footprints, especially about the mouth
of the <span class="it">oubliette</span>. We, therefore, swept the staircase
as far as the windows we had used, after which
Mansel took off his shoes and powdered it over
again by dashing a bag full of plaster against the
wall. We then pulled down most of the remains
of the ceiling, to cover our use of the hall, and,
when all the powder had settled, Hanbury and I
walked once up and down the stairs.</p>

<p>So soon as this was done, we repaired to the
stables, and, whilst Hanbury kept watch in the
gateway, Mansel and Carson and I man-handled
the cars through the courtyard on to the road of
approach. When we felt them moving under
their own weight, we put on the brakes. The
Rolls was in rear.</p>

<p>Then Mansel closed the stables and left by the
kitchen hall door, locking it behind him: and, a
moment later, we were moving down the drive in
silence, except for the creak of leather and the
brush of the tyres.</p>

<p>Hanbury and Carson rode in the first car, and
Mansel, Tester and I went in the Rolls. When we
came to the first bend, Mansel switched on our
lights.</p>

<p>Lest someone of the village should notice that
we were but four, Hanbury and Carson were to
thread it as fast as they could, while Mansel and I
were to stop and call at the inn.</p>

<p>This we did, to find the innkeeper’s wife in an
uneasy temper, for, said she, her husband had gone
out at dusk the day before, but had not said
whither he was going, and had not returned. She
rather feared, she added, that he was gone after
some gypsies who always passed through Carinthia
at this time of the year, and sometimes had with
them horses which they were too ready to sell
below their market worth. Mansel shrugged his
shoulders and paid our account. When the woman
asked if we were going, he said we should be back
in ten days.</p>

<p>With that, we left her standing in the mouth of
the inn, and, presently overtaking the others,
reached Villach within the hour.</p>

<p>And there, whilst we ate our supper, Mansel told
me his tale.</p>

<p>“I measured the distance,” he said, “from the
second nail to the well. I made sure we should
rouse friend Ellis behind the breastwork, but
Carson had him covered, so I counted him out.
The distance was one hundred and eleven yards.
I sank the three buckets and I cut the two pulleys
adrift and let them fall. Then, for the first time,
I glanced at the sconce. <span class="it">It was empty</span>, except for a
hat on the top of a stick. By the side of the stick
was a brazier, made out of a tin, and a handful of
tobacco on some charcoal was smouldering gently.
Not a very elaborate device, but, as no doubt
‘Rose’ Noble surmised, quite good enough to
fool me.</p>

<p>“I confess that I felt humiliated, but I was
much more alarmed. I had sent you down to
play with an empty car—not to take tea with
Ellis, who, you were sure, was asleep a quarter of a
mile away.</p>

<p>“I reached the edge of the wood, to the right of
the combe, in time to see the car being backed out
of sight behind the byre. You were lying on the
ground—to my great relief evidently no worse than
senseless, for Ellis was lashing your wrists behind
your back. Then he and Bunch picked you up
and lugged you behind the byre. I observed that
this had been loop-holed.</p>

<p>“It was clear that nothing could be usefully
done towards your rescue until the sun was down
and you had regained consciousness: so I left
Carson to watch and returned for reinforcements.
Hanbury, of course, believed you half-way to the
shrine. While I was gone, Job and Punter were
posted on either side of the combe. The landlord
was tied to a tree—I suppose, for the night. Job
went to sleep, of course: and, for the second time,
Carson laid him out. It was then that I had the
idea of assuming his personality. I pretended a
wound, of course, to cover my limp: to tire and
crawl in was the corollary of the wound. But I
never hoped to find you without the byre.”</p>

<p>When I tried to say I was grateful, he would
have none of my thanks.</p>

<p>“Had I been in your case,” he said shortly,
“you would have done the same.”</p>

<p>For all that, to go down alone to that byre was
a brave thing to do: and I think the knowledge that
discovery would almost inevitably entail a fate far
more dreadful than any sudden death would have
daunted most men I know.</p>

<div><span class="pageno" title="178" id="Page_178"></span><h1>CHAPTER VI       TESTER GIVES TONGUE</h1></div>

<p class="noindent"><span class="lead-in">We</span> established three bases—one at Salzburg,
another at an inn at Villach, and the third at the
village at which Mansel and Carson and I had
lain on our way to Wagensburg. The name of
this village was St. Martin, and it was distant
from Lerai some thirty-five miles.</p>

<p>One base would have been enough: but three
made our path smooth, for, by their use, curiosity
regarding our movements was, so to speak, stillborn,
and an ample supply of fresh food was
continually assured.</p>

<p>Had we had but one base, the employment of a
car <span class="it">by night only</span>, the regular disappearance and
return of the reliefs into which we were divided,
and the constant demand for food to victual six
men must have excited comment: but, as I shall
show, the use of three bases altogether concealed
our business, suggested that our party was consisting
of but two men, and argued nothing more
eccentric than a zealous interest in exploring the
countryside.</p>

<p>It was early decided that we should labour in
pairs and that of every three days each pair should
pass forty-eight hours in the dungeon and twenty-four
hours abroad. Each pair was to have its own
base, to which it alone would repair, and, the
second car having been bestowed at Salzburg, only
the Rolls would be employed.</p>

<p>Mansel and Carson were to use Salzburg,
Hanbury and Rowley, Villach; Bell and I, St.
Martin.</p>

<p>By way of illustration, Bell and I would leave
St. Martin on a Monday evening, ostensibly to
tour the country, taking sufficient food to last us
for two full days. That night we would enter the
dungeon, and Hanbury and Rowley would leave.
Now, two days’ provision for two is one day’s
provision for four, so that the food we had brought
would feed Mansel, Carson, Bell and myself on
Tuesday, and on Tuesday night Hanbury and
Rowley would be back with a fresh supply. Upon
their arrival, Mansel and Carson would leave,
returning on Wednesday night to relieve myself
and Bell.</p>

<p>This system worked very well: and I am sure
that not one of our respective landlords so much
as suspected the tale which, had it had a tongue,
the Rolls could have told.</p>

<p>The establishment of the bases, the bestowal of
the second car, and the discovery and purchase of
a collapsible boat took more than one day to
accomplish; and forty-eight hours had gone by
before Mansel, Hanbury, Carson and I alighted
finally from the Rolls, two hundred yards from the
river, and a little to the West of the bend above
which the castle stood. The river was flowing
from West to East, so we were up stream.</p>

<p>The night was fine, still, and very dark. For
the last three miles we had travelled without any
lights; but the inhabitants of Carinthia go early
to bed, and we had met no one.</p>

<p>A hiding-place for the car was easy to find, and a
little old quarry, long abandoned to Nature and
approached by a grass-grown track, suited our
purpose admirably. And here, in the thick of some
bushes, we arranged to conceal the boat.</p>

<p>Then Mansel made much of Tester and set him
to guard the car, telling him in so many words that
Hanbury would soon be back to take him away,
and that he himself would return in two days’ time.
I am sure that the dog understood, for all his
sprightliness left him, and he whimpered a little,
when Mansel turned away. Carson told me later
that that was his way; and I can testify to his
indifference, when I brought him to meet Hanbury,
and Hanbury to his excitement when he brought
him to meet his lord.</p>

<p>Then we took up the boat and her sculls and the
tools and the food we had brought, and went down
the river.</p>

<p>This was smooth-flowing, and the current was
slight. After a short search we found a convenient
place, where a tree overhung deep water and a
man could take hold of a branch and lower himself
with ease into a boat below. Here it was simple,
too, to launch the boat, which was astonishingly
light: and Mansel, Carson and I were soon aboard.
The boat would hold but three, and since Hanbury
and Rowley were to lie that night at Villach, the
former stayed where he was.</p>

<p>Three minutes later we were at the mouth of
the shoot, and Mansel put up a hand and rang the
bell. At once the flap was lifted, and I heard Bell
asking if he should show a light.</p>

<p>“On no account,” said Mansel. “But let the
rope-ladder down.”</p>

<p>It must have been near half-an-hour before we
stood in the gallery, for this was, of course, the
first time we had used the shoot, and, since, as I
have said, a third of its mouth was under water,
its passage required some care, unless our clothes
and victuals were to be immersed. Indeed, to go
up or down we always stripped to the skin. The
provisions we saved by the use of a large iron bucket,
with a tight-fitting lid: when we had loaded
this, we spread it with oiled silk before replacing
the lid; so far as I can remember, no water ever
circumvented this rude device. Our clothes were
raised and lowered in a waterproof sheet. After
a while we grew expert, and the relief then came to
be done with a soldierly dispatch.</p>

<p>The first thing we did was to give Rowley his
instructions and pack him off. Mansel was none
too easy at letting him go alone, but he said that
he was a swimmer, and knew how to pull an oar,
and, since the sculls were so fastened that they
could not leave the boat, it seemed certain that he
would come safely to the other side.</p>

<p>“All the same,” said Mansel, “you must give us
a sign, and, as I’m afraid to let you show a light,
you must take this cord. Fasten it to the painter,
and, when you’ve found Mr. Hanbury, cast it off.
But, before you do that, tie two knots at its end.
So soon as we find it slack, we shall pull it in: and,
if the knots are there, we shall know that you’re
safe.”</p>

<p>With that, we put out the light and opened the
shoot, and, five minutes later, two knots at the
end of the cord told us that Rowley and his master
had joined forces.</p>

<p>Bell had nothing to report: but he and Rowley
had ordered all our stuff so conveniently that,
without more ado, we were able to go to bed.</p>

<p>The next morning the new work was begun.</p>

<p>Mansel and Carson had bathed before I was
awake, and, by the time I was ready, the measurements
had been taken, and everything was in train.</p>

<p>Precisely at five o’clock I cut the first stone
out of the dungeon wall: and, before half an hour
had gone by, we had made a rectangular breach,
three feet by nine feet high. To these dimensions
we adhered, for, though such a height was uncalled
for, it allowed the swing of a pickaxe and so paid
for its maintenance many times over. To our
relief, the soil behind proved sandy and so easy
to work: but this condition convinced us that, as
we drove our tunnel, so we must prop its roof and
retain its walls with timber against a subsidence
or bulge. To do this was simple, but how to
procure the timber I could not think: yet Mansel
had found out a way within the hour.</p>

<p>Some ten miles away stood a saw-mill: and there
was plenty of wood such as would suit us well. Of
this Mansel proposed to purchase a stack and to
drive as hard a bargain as ever he could. He
would then require its free delivery to Wagensburg,
“at which,” said he, “the miller will certainly
kick, for to carry a load of timber up that road of
approach, would make Hercules scratch his head.
After an argument, we shall come to a compromise.
I shall pay nothing for delivery, and he will dump
the wood in the quarry where we stable the car.
Thence, with a very ill grace, I shall consent to
fetch it, as and when it is required.”</p>

<p>And so it fell out: so that in two days’ time we
had ready to hand a great store of wood, of which
few knew and none, I think, thought anything.</p>

<p>For the time being, however, we were hard put
to it to find so much as a makeshift to stay the
roof of the shaft: but, after a little, we sawed in
pieces some benches, which we had found in the
kitchen, and two days before had lowered into the
<span class="it">oubliette</span>: with their wood and that of some cases
which had contained supplies, we contrived such
temporary props as made it safe to proceed.</p>

<p>The soil we displaced we cast into the great
dungeon, piling it up by the walls, for, though we
must presently empty our winnings out of the
shoot, to set ourselves this task before our time
would have been unprofitable.</p>

<p>The work went apace, for we were strong men and
determined, and laboured faithfully by shifts, so
that the most was made of our endurance. There
was plenty of air, and the conditions were, I imagine,
much more pleasant than such as usually govern
work below ground, for the dungeon was cool and
spacious, and the second chamber made an admirable
lounge.</p>

<p>Although we knew our direction, we were less
sure of our relation to the chamber, so far as depth
was concerned: but, after consultation, we decided
to keep the floor of our shaft fifteen feet above
that of the <span class="it">oubliette</span>: for the meadow lay higher
than the kitchen by at the least five feet, and,
with another nine feet—that is to say, the height
of our tunnel—to correct any vertical error, we
surely could not go wrong. We, therefore, drove
the shaft to this level, and kept it faithfully there
up to the very end. By using the compass, we
checked our direction as we went, taking the
bearing at least twice in the day, to avoid waste of
labour.</p>

<p>It had been arranged that Bell and I should
leave, when Hanbury and Rowley returned, but
our need of timber was so pressing that Carson and
Mansel, who alone could deal with the miller, left
in our stead. So Bell lay four nights in succession
in the second chamber. This order, once taken,
it seemed convenient to preserve: and, thereafter,
Hanbury always relieved Mansel, Mansel me, and
I Hanbury.</p>

<p>Because his base was at Salzburg, Mansel had
much less leisure than Hanbury or I: for not only
was Salzburg more distant than either St. Martin
or Villach, but such odd things as we needed were
better to be found in that town, so that duties of
one sort or another were constantly imposing
upon his time of rest. But, if ever we pointed this
out, he would not listen, maintaining that he did
very well and enjoyed any sort of occupation
better than idleness.</p>

<p>Of the first day’s labour there is no more to tell
than of that of any other; and, since driving a
shaft is a dull business, I shall not set down our
progress, but only continue—as I have already
begun, though something, I fear, at haphazard—to
record such details as I think may illumine, as
a picture a tale, the dry fact of our long labour;
as well our odd doubts and difficulties, and the
means we devised to lay them, as the happenings
which stand clean out of the next six weeks and
have little or nothing to do with our main
endeavour: this was, in so many words, to reach
the treasure-chamber before the thieves.</p>

<hr />

<p>Our constant fear was that we should strike
rock, for with that we knew very well we could
not reckon, and to try to surmount such an obstacle
would be work forlorn. Indeed, for a long time,
whenever the pick struck a stone which was
uncommonly obstinate, our hearts went into our
mouths for fear that we had encountered this
dreadful enemy: but, though more than once
the size and rigidity of some boulder as good as
realized our fears, we were spared this terrible
blow, and never met anything worse than a long
course of clay which later gave way to gravel as
suddenly as it had taken its place.</p>

<p>We bathed morning and evening by way of the
shoot: and, since we had no means of drying our
towels, the relief always brought some fresh ones
to carry it through its term. Our linen, of course,
we could change when we went to the base. Indeed,
all things considered, we were very well found and
suffered next to no discomfort. The pavement
of the gallery, certainly, made a hard bed: but,
after a full day’s labour, I think anyone of us
could have slumbered upon the stile itself.</p>

<p>Examining this hideous death-bed, while they
were yet alone, Rowley and Bell had found two
naked poniards lying between the fences and
covered with dust. The hilt of one was golden
and very well done: the other’s was of silver and
plainly made. I think there is little doubt that
they had belonged to two victims, who were wearing
them when they fell; and that the shock of the
falls had shaken them out of their scabbards and
down, clear of the bodies which they had lately
adorned.</p>

<p>Though I never found the work irksome, I
enjoyed my nights at St. Martin and my days in
the open air. Upon these I had seldom anything
to do except to take my ease: for, as I have said,
Salzburg could best supply such needs as we had,
and Mansel and Carson always cared for the Rolls.
By Mansel’s advice, I took to trout-fishing, for
that was a quiet engagement and rested body and
soul: and many a pleasant hour I passed beside
some comfortable stream, gaining more refreshment
than fish, of which I took very few, whilst Bell and
Tester went rambling somewhere within call, like
children let out of school, revelling in the mysteries
of wood and meadow, and turning idleness into an
enterprise.</p>

<p>The weather was wonderfully fine: though
sometimes rain fell, the fall was always heavy and
soon past, and I do not remember one day that
was overcast or unseasonable.</p>

<p>A storm burst one night whilst the relief was
taking place, or, to be more precise, when Mansel
and Carson were sculling to the mouth of the
shoot. Quick as we were, before they stood in the
gallery their clothes were wet through; but, though
the downpour was frightful, Bell and I dared not
delay, lest the boat should be swamped. I never
stripped more reluctantly, and even the river
seemed snug beside the nakedness of the boat.
The rain lashed my bare skin, whilst I sat waiting
for Bell, but, when he came down and laid hold
of the gunwale, as usual, to come aboard, of my
endeavour to trim the craft, I slipped on the
dripping thwart and fell clean into the river,
capsizing the boat as I went. Meantime, unaware
of this misadventure, those in the gallery let down
our clothes with a run, and, believing that we had
the bundle, lowered it into the water before they
found out their mistake. However, we took no
hurt, nor even cold in spite of our thirty-mile
drive, which shows, I think, that we were in very
good condition.</p>

<p>The search-light consumed much power; so,
when Mansel left for Salzburg, he always took with
him one battery and brought back another charged.</p>

<p>Our wireless set afforded us great pleasure. We
received the English stations very well and so
heard the news every evening, and music, whenever
we pleased: but I fancy those that made it little
dreamed that their notes were larding the shadows
of so sinister a place.</p>

<p>That the dungeon and the chamber made up a
grim suite cannot be denied: and, though no one
of us said such a thing, I think we could all have
spared the grisly memories with which the spot
seemed charged. We were too tired to dream:
what dreadful matters might else have ridden our
slumbers! We laboured upon a scaffold and took
our rest in a morgue: we came and went the way
dead men had gone—surely, ‘such stuff as dreams
are made on,’ ill dreams. But, happily for us, we
were too tired to dream. Still, if some tales may
be believed, not every weary man has been so
favoured. Indeed, if the pitiful dead walk, they
must have picked their way between us as we lay
in the gallery of nights: but, perhaps because we
were so sorry for them, and found their murder so
detestable, they had compassion on the strangers
within their gates.</p>

<p>So the days went by, and we drove the shaft
forward, propping it with timber as we went.</p>

<hr />

<p>We had laboured for more than a week, before
we went out to see how the thieves were faring.
We were all impatient to know what things were
happening in the enemy’s camp, but; as Mansel
said at the time, we knew far better than they
that for the moment the treasure was out of their
reach, and to gratify pure curiosity at the expense
of our work would have been the way of a schoolgirl.
“All the same,” he continued, “we mustn’t
behave as though they had thrown in their hand:
and, when they’ve had time to find out that they are
no match for the springs and that <span class="it">without assistance</span>
they never will lower the water as far as the shaft,
that will be the moment at which to begin to
watch. If you must know what another is going
to do, when he will not tell you and your chances of
observation are limited, the best of all ways to find
out is to try to assume his outlook and to put yourself
in his place. Very well. I may be wrong, but I
think, when they’re sick of baling, they’ll purchase
a pump. And, when that proves useless, as it will,
they’ll lift up their eyes to the fact that <span class="it">help they
must have</span>. They won’t like the look of that fact,
and they’ll waste quite a lot of good time trying to
find a way round: but at last <span class="it">they’ll accept it</span>. And
that is why it behoves us to drive our tunnel as
fast as ever we can.”</p>

<p>On the evening of the tenth day, soon after the
sun had set, Mansel and Carson and I went out to
see what we could. Hanbury had been warned
not to return before midnight, for we did not want
our reconnaissance to delay or embarrass the relief.</p>

<p>We swam up stream, keeping close to the cliff,
each with his clothes and pistol tied up in a wrap of
oiled silk and strapped to the back of his head.
Soon the cliff gave way to the steep slope of the
woods; and at once Mansel, who was leading,
took hold of an overhanging bough and swung himself
on to dry land and out of sight. Carson
and I followed. An immediate observation of the
road beyond the river showed that, so far as we
could see, there was no one in sight.</p>

<p>We judged that, by going straight up, we should
come to the sentinel peak: and, so soon as we had
put on our clothes, we began to climb up through
the forest in single file.</p>

<p>Either our judgment was at fault, or we bore
too much to the left, for, after ten minutes’ walking,
we saw the walls of the castle a bare thirty paces
away. We, therefore, bent to the right and, using
extreme caution, made our way under cover to the
spot where I had met Bell on the night of the
attack on the well.</p>

<p>We were now at the edge of the meadow, and
nearly as close to the well as, short of entering the
open, a man could come.</p>

<p>The light was fast failing, but as yet we could
see well enough.</p>

<p>The redoubt had been finished and now stood some
six feet high about the well. I am sure it was
loop-holed, but this did not appear: probably the
loop-holes were covered, whilst they were out of
use. Of this fastness a third part was roofed,
with what I could not distinguish, but rafters had
plainly been laid from the wall to the cupola of the
well. There was, therefore, some shelter from the
heaven; but I could not help thinking that our
quarters, grim as they were, were a hundred times
more secure and comfortable than this wretched
abode, which was, indeed, no better than the byre
from which it had sprung.</p>

<p>There was a light burning behind the wall, and once
or twice we heard voices; but we could see no movement
without, and there was no sound of any labour.</p>

<p>Then Mansel bade Carson and me stay where we
were, and himself stole forward along the edge of
the wood. He was gone some time, and, when he
returned, it was dark. There was, he reported, no
sentry that he could locate, nor any sign of the
car, which he thought was probably abroad. “If
I am right,” he added, “there are but three of them
here, and to judge from the voices, all those are
within the redoubt. We have, therefore, a chance
of eavesdropping which may not occur again.
And now do exactly as I do: lift up your feet well
and mind your step.”</p>

<p>With that, he began to step lightly over the grass,
making straight for the covered portion of the
redoubt: and, a moment later, we were standing
beneath its wall, able distinctly to hear every word
that was said.</p>

<p>“Live an’ let live, Rose,” said Punter’s voice.
“What’s the matter with the pump?”</p>

<p>“That,” said ‘Rose’ Noble, “is just what I
want to know. If the pump’s going to shift the
water, why didn’t Big Willie have a pump?”</p>

<p>“ ’Cause he didn’t have time to go an’ get one
before we blew in.”</p>

<p>“He’d a day and a half,” said ‘Rose’ Noble.
“And Big Willie’s not the —— to dig a hole with
his fingers, when he can have a spade.”</p>

<p>“A nerror of judgment,” said Job. “That’s
wot it was. They ’ad to choose between goin’ an’
gettin’ a pump and ’avin’ a dart with their pails.
Directly I see the water, I says, ‘ ’Ere’s room for
a pump.’ I know. I ’ad to watch one once.”</p>

<p>“ ‘Watch one’?” said ‘Rose’ Noble, contemptuously.
“What do you mean—‘Watch
one’?”</p>

<p>“ ‘Watch one,’ ” repeated Job. “They ’ave to
be watched, of course. But they’ll deliver the
goods. I tell you, we’ll empty this well in a couple
of hours. Wait till you see the —— a-buzzin’
away.”</p>

<p>“My God,” said ‘Rose’ Noble, brokenly. “He
thinks it’s a motor-pump.” Punter let out a guffaw.
“You —— milkmaid, where would we get the
power? Where’s the current to drive it? Where’s
the plumbers and masons to set it up? I thought
you seemed damned anxious to have a pump.
Saw yourself ‘watching it,’ I suppose—with a
bottle of Bass in your pocket and a fag in your face.”</p>

<p>“But——”</p>

<p>“It’s going to be worked by hand, Job,” continued
his relentless comforter. “<span class="it">Your</span> hand. You will
have to work very hard, pushing a bar to and fro.
I think it probable that you will sweat. Yes, I
thought that’d faze you, you lazy skunk. There’s
a million down in that well, but, rather than work
for a week, you’ll let it lie.”</p>

<p>“ ‘Lazy’?” screeched Job. “ ‘<span class="it">Lazy</span>’? Look
at my —— hands.”</p>

<p>“Oh, I reckon they’re dirty,” said ‘Rose’
Noble. “You haven’t drawn enough water to
rinse them clean.” The other’s protest he scorched
with a terrible oath. “Oh, if I’d ‘Holy’ Gordon
and two of his lads! They didn’t care where they
slept, whiles the job was raw. They’d’ve shifted
a —— river, if it was keeping gold.” He expired
violently. “Are you certain sure there’s no one
back in the house?”</p>

<p>“Certain sure,” said Punter. “And every mark’s
as it was. There’s no one been through that
courtyard for more than a week.”</p>

<p>“Then, what’s their game?” said ‘Rose’
Noble, half to himself.</p>

<p>“You can search me,” said Punter. “I’ve
dreamed about it o’ nights.”</p>

<p>“One thing’s plain,” said the other. “They’re
banking upon our failure to lick those springs.”</p>

<p>“An’ I don’t blame them,” muttered Job. “I’d
back the —— myself.”</p>

<p>Punter disregarded the gloss.</p>

<p>“An’, when we’ve chucked in our hand, they’re
comin’ back.”</p>

<p>“That’s too easy,” said ‘Rose’ Noble.
“Besides, they’re a heap too careful to swallow a
risk like that. Big Willie’s not got his feet up.
But I’d give a bag of money to know his game.”</p>

<p>“Rose,” said Punter, “they’re waitin’. What
else can they do? They didn’t half like that bomb.
So they gave us the well. But they’re watchin’ an’
prayin’ all right, and, as soon as the pump starts
suckin’, they’ll show a leg.”</p>

<p>“Maybe they will,” said ‘Rose’ Noble. “But
don’t tell me they’re sitting still. I’ve seen these
Willies before, and they’re not that shape. I’d
swear they were digging, but where’s their ——
shaft?”</p>

<p>“ ‘Diggin’ ’,” said Job. “My Gawd.”</p>

<p>“Where’s the use?” said Punter. “Say they’ve
drove a tunnel as far as the well: you’d want
half Lancashire to do it, but say they have. Well,
who’s going to pull out a brick? There’s nothin’
the matter with the treasure, but there’s fifty tons
of water waitin’ the other side. Talk about a
dam burstin’. You don’t have to be an engineer
to——”</p>

<p>“There’s a snag somewhere,” said ‘Rose’
Noble. “I can feel it in my bones. They’re
moving: I’ll swear they’re moving: and I think
they’re under ground. What did they want with
the well that afternoon?”</p>

<p>“They wanted the buckets,” said Punter.</p>

<p>“No they didn’t,” said ‘Rose’ Noble. “If
that was all they were after, why wouldn’t young
Willie speak? If you want my opinion, those
buckets are down in the well. When Mansel had
got what he wanted, he just looked around to see
what mess he could make: and the buckets came
first.”</p>

<p>“You don’t say?” said Punter. And then,
“The dirty dog.”</p>

<p>I was aghast at the man’s perspicacity, but
Mansel, beside me, began to shake with laughter.</p>

<p>“The point is,” said ‘Rose’ Noble, “what did
Big Willie want?”</p>

<p>No one vouchsafed any answer, and, after a
pause, he continued, weighing his words.</p>

<p>“That pup was too blasted glib with his answers
about the well. He wasn’t lying, but he talked like
a —— guide. Why? I’ll give you two answers, and
you can take your choice. <span class="it">Either he was giving us
a line which they had found N.B.G.: or else he left
out of his budget some one essential fact.</span>” He hesitated
there for a moment. Then he went slowly on,
speaking as though to himself. “ ‘A chamber,’ he
called it: and then, ‘a recess in the wall’.”</p>

<p>“That’s right,” said Punter. “You bet it’s a
sort of a cell, with a gratin’ to keep the bags from
washin’ away.”</p>

<p>“Much more likely walled up,” the other replied.
“No point in wet gold, if you can have it dry.
And there’s where I’m bogged,” he added violently,
“<span class="it">There’s something below they know of that we can’t
guess.</span> By —— if I knew where they were.”</p>

<p>“Might help, might not,” said Punter.</p>

<p>“ ‘Might’?” sneered ‘Rose’ Noble. “ ‘<span class="it">Might</span>’?”
I could hear him suck in his breath. “Any one of
the six would do: Little Willie, for choice. I
shouldn’t lose him twice. And I guess he’d see the
point of putting us wise. A man mayn’t value his
life, but he’s always devilish sticky about parting
with one of his skins.”</p>

<p>With his words came the chink of glass, and
some liquid was poured.</p>

<p>“Seein’ ’s better than believin’,” said Punter.
“Here’s to the —— pump.”</p>

<p>I suppose the toast was honoured, and, after a
moment, somebody rose to his feet.</p>

<p>“You two stay here,” said ‘Rose’ Noble.
“I’m going out for a stroll.”</p>

<p>Had I been alone, I should have run for cover,
and, as like as not, had a bullet in my back for my
pains. But Mansel stood fast. By his instant
direction, Carson and I lay down while he set his
back to the wall, sank his chin on his chest—to
hide, as he afterwards told me, the white of his
face—and folded his arms.</p>

<p>It seemed an age before ‘Rose’ Noble passed
by, for he went very slowly, as a man in his enemy’s
camp, and every four or five paces he stood where
he was, still as a graven image, using his eyes and
ears. Indeed, I shall always believe that the
fellow’s instinct had told him that we were at
hand, for I never saw demeanour so suspicious,
and I think that, but for the light of the lamp
with which he had just been sitting, which had taken
the edge from his vision, he must have perceived
Mansel, for he certainly looked straight at him for
two or three seconds at a time.</p>

<p>At last, however, the darkness swallowed him up,
and Mansel lifted his head. For a moment he stood
peering: then he signed to me to lie still and began
to steal, like a shadow, the way the other had
gone. I was taken aback at his movement, for,
armed though he was, to go after the monster
alone seemed out of reason. And, when I
remembered the humour ‘Rose’ Noble was in,
I broke into a sweat.</p>

<p>It was not Mansel’s way to shoot a man in the
back, and, since I made sure he was gone to kill
‘Rose’ Noble, I lay awaiting his challenge with
my heart in my mouth. But, after four or five
minutes, to my surprise and relief, Mansel emerged
from the shadows, as silently as he had gone, and
whispered to Carson and me to get to our feet.
Then he drew our heads together and spoke in our
ears.</p>

<p>“ ‘Rose’ Noble has gone to the castle: while
he’s out of the way, I’m going to satisfy Punter
that we’re playing a waiting game. Carson will
stay here and watch. If ‘Rose’ Noble returns,
shoot him. If he doesn’t, the moment I say ‘Good
night,’ make straight for the sentinel peak.
Chandos, you come with me, and do as I say.”</p>

<p>With that, he walked round the redoubt, with
me at his heels. A gap in the wall to the South
served as a narrow doorway and suffered the
gutter to pass, and, after a careful survey, Mansel
stepped lightly within.</p>

<p>“Good evening,” he said. “Put up your hands,
please. And, above all, make no sound.”</p>

<p>The prohibition was needless, for Punter and Job
were so much dumbfounded that neither of them, I am
sure, could have cried out to save his life. Indeed,
they sat like two waxworks, staring upon Mansel
as though he were an apparition, with their jaws
fallen and their eyes bulging out of their heads.
Both were unshaven, and Punter was in his socks:
a sorry pair of boots was standing on the rim of
the well. The covered portion of the fastness was
directly opposed to the doorway—above which
hung a canvas blind, now hitched to one side—on
the farther side of the well: and, since the two
were there seated with their backs to the wall,
Mansel had stepped to one side to have them in
better view.</p>

<p>“Put up your hands,” he repeated.</p>

<p>The two obeyed.</p>

<p>Something between them and Mansel stirred in
its sleep: and I saw that this was the innkeeper,
stretched on the bare ground and tied, like a dog,
to one of the pillars of the well.</p>

<p>“I’m sorry to intrude,” said Mansel, “but I’ve
come all the way from Vichy, and to make such a
journey for nothing is not my way. The really
annoying thing is I’ve forgotten my measuring-line:
but I dare say you can lend me some cord. William,
there’s a coil on your left. Just make it fast to
that crow-bar, and take the depth.”</p>

<p>I instantly fell to work, and a moment later the
crow-bar was descending the well. While I was
thus engaged, Mansel continued to talk.</p>

<p>“You see,” said he, “though I don’t suppose
you know it, these springs are intermittent. It’s a
well-known thing in Natural History, an intermittent
spring. It ebbs and flows, you know, rather like
the tides of the sea. Well, we had them on the
ebb: and, if you’d got down to it that night you’d
have had the treasure. I confess I was rather
anxious, but when I took the depth the next day,
while you were down in the combe, to my intense
relief I found that the flood had begun. Now I
shouldn’t tell you all this if the information would
do you the slightest good. But it won’t: and I’ll
tell you why. <span class="it">Because you don’t know when to
expect the ebb.</span> That’s where the well-digger’s
statement is so valuable. Of course you can find
out—by the process of—er—exhaustion.”</p>

<p>Here I touched bottom and began to pull up
the bar.</p>

<p>“When it’s up,” said Mansel to me, “extend
your arms and measure from tip to tip. You’re
just six feet, aren’t you?”</p>

<p>I nodded, and he returned to Punter and
Job.</p>

<p>“Of course, to get up against Nature is no end
of a job. There’s a proverb you probably know,
which is rather in point. ‘You can drive Nature
out with a pitchfork, <span class="it">but she’ll always come back</span>.’
I know you’re not using a pitchfork: you’re using
a bucket instead. But, pitchfork or bucket, as
you see, the result is the same. <span class="it">She always comes
back.</span>”</p>

<p>The cheerful tone in which Mansel delivered this
dismal homily and the unpleasantly obvious pertinence
of his remarks had their effect: for Punter
looked ready to burst with mortification, and Job
was regarding his second comforter with the fishy
stare of one who perceives his fortune to be almost
too repugnant to be true. Indeed, I had much ado
to keep a straight face, and I dared not look at
Mansel, for, if our eyes had met, I am sure the
humour of the case would have been too much for
us. I, therefore, busied myself with measuring
roughly as much of the cord as was wet, and
presently reported my finding of fifty-four feet.</p>

<p>“Dear, dear,” said Mansel. “That’s shocking.
Why, the well will be full before dawn. You might
just as well have rested to-day. Never mind.
There’s nothing like exercise. And I expect you
miss Ellis and Bunch.”</p>

<p>That shaft stung Job into speech.</p>

<p>“ ‘Miss Ellis’?” he groaned. “Oh, good-night,
nurse!”</p>

<p>I was shaking with laughter, but Mansel only
smiled.</p>

<p>“I passed them, coming from Salzburg. To be
frank I don’t think they saw me: but they ought
to have known the car. And now I must go.
I’m sorry to miss ‘Rose’ Noble, but you must
make my excuses and say I was pressed for time.
Good night.”</p>

<p>With that he began to go backwards, and I
stepped across the redoubt and out of the gap in
its wall. The next second Mansel emerged, and
we ran like hares for cover towards the sentinel
peak.</p>

<p>“Behind a tree,” breathed Mansel. “They’re
certain to fire.”</p>

<p>As I whipped round a trunk, somebody fired
from the doorway, but the bullet passed over our
heads.</p>

<p>“We must wait for ‘Rose’ Noble,” said Mansel.
“And, while they’re putting him wise, we can go
on our way. You can’t fire straight and argue at
one and the same time.”</p>

<p>‘Rose’ Noble must have been returning, when
the shot was fired, for we heard his voice almost
at once demanding the truth.</p>

<p>Instead of telling him directly that we were at
hand in the wood, both Punter and Job began to
report what had passed with an incoherence which
would have distracted anyone, and in an instant
they were all three raving like men possessed.
Under shelter of this exhibition, we beat our retreat,
and, presently joining Carson, passed over the
shoulder of the hill and back the way we had come.</p>

<p>We were well pleased with what we had found,
but the head and front of our contentment was
naturally furnished by Mansel’s brilliant stroke.
Indeed, I cannot believe that the shrewdest of
diplomats ever delivered a more dexterous thrust;
and, when it is remembered that Mansel’s performance
was improvised, that he conceived and executed
it with his life, so to speak, in his hand, I think it
will be clear that he was a man of lightning apprehension
and notable detachment.</p>

<p>By his admirable fable of the intermittent springs
he had offered an answer, at once most credible
and gloomy, to every one of the problems that
troubled the thieves, and had hanged a very millstone
about ‘Rose’ Noble’s neck, for, by confirming
the bulk of the suspicions which the latter
had openly avowed, he had highly prejudiced such
efforts to hearten his fellows as the monster might
presently make.</p>

<p>Indeed, as we afterwards learned, for a fortnight
after his exploit, next to no water was taken out
of the well, but ‘Rose’ Noble spent all of his time
quelling mutinies, eating his own words and striving
by hook or by crook to hold the gang together against
some future attempt. That in this he succeeded
does him, to my mind, great credit, for I have
shown many times how ill he was served and what
poor stomachs for work or for danger the other
thieves had.</p>

<p>And here let me say that, to give the devil his
due, ‘Rose’ Noble possessed a commanding
personality, swift, vigilant and unearthly strong:
and, behind it, like some familiar, stood his
astounding instinct, continually showing him things
which no manner of wisdom or prudence could
ever have perceived. It seems he never ceased to
maintain that we were digging, and that with a
conviction so infectious that, although he could
produce not one jot or tittle of warrant for what he
said, the others came to accept this surmise as an
established fact, and, though they would draw no
water, to search with more or less diligence for any
sign of a shaft. And that was, I think, a remarkable
achievement: and, as is sometimes the way,
it had its reward.</p>

<hr />

<p>No one of us will ever forget the ninth night of
June.</p>

<p>That day we had driven our shaft as far as the
point from which Mansel had taken the bearing of
the well, that is to say, we had covered just eighty-one
yards: and there we had altered our course so
as to head directly for where the chamber must
lie. It seemed certain that eighty-nine yards, at
the most, remained to be pierced; but we had
fair reason to think that the distance would prove to
be less, and that, when we had covered another
eighty yards, we might expect any moment
to strike the chamber. We were, therefore, come
roughly half way to the region we sought: and
this elated us all, as did the knowledge that the
thieves were making no serious endeavour to empty
the well: for, though because of their vigilance,
we had been unable again to approach the redoubt,
we had twice visited the spot upon which the gutter
discharged and found it comparatively dry.</p>

<p>It was Hanbury’s turn to relieve Mansel: the
night was warm and moonlit, and there was no
wind at all.</p>

<p>The relief was more than half done: Carson,
indeed, had already descended the shoot, and
Mansel was stripped to the waist, <span class="it">when we heard
Tester give tongue</span>.</p>

<p>Sharp and clear, across the water came his
deep, vigorous bark, bold and menacing.</p>

<p>For an instant we stood breathless, staring at
the three long windows, through which the sound
had come. Then, in a flash, Mansel had entered
the shoot. I followed immediately, clad only in a
zephyr and shorts, and was in the boat almost as
soon as he. Without a word Carson bent to the
sculls, and the craft leaped forward.</p>

<p>Our passage, usually so soon over, seemed that
night as though it would never be done, and I
well remember remarking how lovely the landscape
looked, and what a queer contrast we offered—all
of us dripping, and Carson, except for his shoes,
mother-naked. All the time Tester was baying
someone furiously.</p>

<p>We were unarmed, and, as we came to the
bank:</p>

<p>“Single file, please,” said Mansel. “We mustn’t
bunch. And, when we come to the track, you will
bear to the right and Carson to the left.”</p>

<p>I had the painter, and, before I had made fast
the boat, Mansel and Carson were ashore and out
of my sight.</p>

<p>Now the track which led to the quarry lay
seventy paces or so from the river’s bank, some
half of which they had run before I was out of the
boat. An impression was, therefore, given that
we were but two, and I ran straight into some
stranger at the mouth of the track. He had clearly
let the others go by and was making good his escape.
He was a giant of a man, but I am no feather-weight,
and the shock of our encounter sent us both to the
ground. I was up in an instant, but he was quicker
than I, and, what was worse, fleeter of foot, for,
although I pursued him West for a mile or more,
he gradually drew away and I had to give up his
pursuit.</p>

<p>I then returned to the quarry, to Mansel’s evident
relief; for all he had heard was our fall, and,
before he had been able to reach the mouth of the
track, the stranger and I were out of earshot. The
car did not seem to have been touched, and no one
of her locks had been tampered with: Tester was
safe and sound: neither Mansel nor Carson had
seen or heard anyone, and it seemed likely that
the man I had chased had been the sole occasion
of Tester’s wrath. Particularly to describe him,
however, was beyond my power, for we had met in
the shadows, and I had not seen his face. He was
not one of the thieves nor yet the innkeeper; and,
unless they had been reinforced, there was little to
suggest that he had to do with the enemy, or,
indeed, was anything more to be feared than an
inquisitive peasant who had noticed George
Hanbury’s arrival and found his behaviour strange.
As such we found him unwelcome, but, if he was
to see us no more, harmless. Yet, there was
about the business one curious, disquieting fact,
slight in its way as any ghost, yet one that we
could not lay.</p>

<p>The fellow was a tanner by trade. That I could
swear, for he reeked of the tannery. Now, I have
always found an odour more reminiscent than even
a melody, and I have but to become aware of some
perfume to remember directly the circumstances
in which I have smelt it before. Yet, though, the
moment I scented the fellow, I knew I had
encountered his like or his occupation quite recently,
for the life of me I could not recall when or where
it had been, and no artifice of Mansel’s could bring
it back to my mind. In the ordinary way we
should have dismissed the matter, but we could not
help feeling that, if here was a clue to the interloper’s
identity, it would be highly imprudent to
cast it away; and, for myself, I was puzzled, for it
was unlike my memory, having got so far, to be
able to get no further. At last, however, we set
aside the riddle, for there was work to be done,
and, as Mansel said with reason, “sometimes the
brain is mulish, and will do better if you put up
your cudgel and let it be.”</p>

<p>Our policy had been always to take no avoidable
risk, and, since if the car had been discovered, our
store of timber also had been remarked, we at once
decided to get as much of this as the cover of night
would allow into the <span class="it">oubliette</span>. As a rule, the
relief had brought enough wood to last us for
twenty-four hours, and this much had been delivered
by Hanbury and Rowley that night; but, since
without timber to advance the shaft would be at
best a very perilous business, to transfer every balk
that we could seemed but a natural precaution.</p>

<p>We, therefore, set about this removal without
more ado. Rowley was brought to help us, while
Hanbury and Bell stayed to receive the wood. We
laboured with all our might till an hour before dawn,
by which time we had carried a great deal, though
not, it appeared, so much as we had already
employed.</p>

<p>We made no attempt to find a fresh hiding-place
for the car; for, for one thing, we had no mind to
leave her any more unattended, and, for another,
it seemed better in future to berth her each night
at a different point, so that, if our visit was expected,
at least we should not be playing clean into some
peeper’s hands. The boat and sculls we decided
to bestow in a culvert some four miles away, for
they were nothing to carry, and, to take them up,
as we passed, would be but a moment’s work.</p>

<p>The sky was pale when Rowley and I stood
again in the gallery, and before Mansel could come
to Salzburg, we knew that the sun would be high:
but the smell of the timber all about us did our
hearts good, and we lay down to sleep for an hour
in the comfortable state of a garrison whose store
of munitions is no longer without the fort.</p>

<p>Now, whether it was this reflection or the scent
of the sawn wood that jogged my memory I cannot
tell: but my mind whipped back to the tanner,
and in a twinkling I remembered when and where
I had noticed his particular odour before. And
that put an end to my slumber before it was ever
begun, and to that of the others as well: for,
though I had clean forgotten it, I now recalled
perfectly that <span class="it">I had become aware of the smell of
tan at one and the same instant that I was felled
from behind on that night of alarms and excursions
when Mansel was down in the well</span>.</p>

<div><span class="pageno" title="212" id="Page_212"></span><h1>CHAPTER VII       ‘ROSE’ NOBLE MOVES</h1></div>

<p class="noindent"><span class="lead-in">There</span> was, naturally, much to be said: but, till
Mansel returned to the dungeon, there was nothing
to be done. And, since the commentary he made,
so soon as he heard my news, was far more valuable
than the swarm of conclusions which we had drawn
out of the matter, I will set it down, using his words.</p>

<p>“A great deal is depending on how much the
tanner saw. If he saw two come in the car, the
presence of a third must have told him that we
have some hiding-place hereabouts: if he saw the
relief carrying timber, that should have made him
think: but, if he saw the boat cross the river, he
must know a damned sight too much. And it was
a moonlit night.</p>

<p>“The point is—what will he do?</p>

<p>“His instinct will be to put the innkeeper wise.
But the innkeeper is in balk. He will, therefore,
endeavour to communicate with him without the
knowledge of the thieves. And the only way to
do that is through the inn.</p>

<p>“Now, I think it more than likely that now and
again the landlord returns to his inn—<span class="it">under escort</span>,
of course. Otherwise, long before now, a hue and
cry would have been raised. And that wouldn’t
suit ‘Rose’ Noble. About once a week, I imagine,
they take him back to the inn: and they give him
to understand that, if he gets out of the car, that’s
the last living movement he’ll make. Again, he
has, without doubt, been straitly advised that
upon the first sign of any attempt at his rescue he
will immediately die. If they’ve got these things
into his head—and, though he can’t speak German,
from what I’ve seen of ‘Rose’ Noble, I should
say he was ‘above Babel’—not fifty home-sweet-homes
will drag him out of that car; and he
probably tells his people that he’s having the time
of his life. And that’s the way, I expect, they get
their supplies.</p>

<p>“Very well. If the tanner tells the innkeeper,
what will the latter do? <span class="it">I think it more than likely
that he will give us away.</span> I don’t say he’ll do so
deliberately: but the tanner’s tidings will startle
him, and, unless he’s alone to receive them—and
that is most improbable—the thieves will perceive
his emotion and demand to be told its cause.</p>

<p>“The first thing to do, therefore, is to visit the
inn. If I had known this last night, I’d have gone
there to-day. As it is, we must wait. I imagine
that trouble is coming: but, unless the luck is
against us, I don’t think it’s coming just yet.”</p>

<p>And that, for the moment, was as much as
Mansel said: but, as later that night I sailed
through the sleeping country towards St. Martin,
I could not help wondering whether I was not
making this now familiar journey for the last time,
and, though the next day was fair as a day can be,
I had no pleasure in it, and the pastime of fishing
seemed to have lost its savour. Yet, I might have
spared my concern; for, when I returned to the
dungeon, it was to find all well, and throughout the
relief we seemed to have the world to ourselves.</p>

<p>That night Mansel and Hanbury visited the
track below the combe, but found no sign of water
drawn out of the well. When Bell and I were come,
we began to take in more wood: by dint of working
till cock-crow without a break, we carried all that
was left, to our comfort more of mind than of body,
for, when it was all under ground, we could hardly
move.</p>

<p>While we were thus engaged, some fifteen yards
of our tunnel started to bulge and had to be shored
up before we continued the shaft.</p>

<p>The next day Mansel visited Lerai and ate his
lunch at the inn. The landlord’s wife proved only
too willing to talk, and the first thing that Mansel
learned was that her husband seemed to have
thrown in his lot with the thieves, though what in
the world they were doing and where they were
she could not tell. With that, she had wrung her
hands and presently thrown her apron over her
head, declaring with tears that, if there was rogues’
company to be had, her lord would be sure to find
it, though it lay a day’s journey off: for his mother
had been a Roman, and, though she had died at
his birth, the blood of lawlessness was in his veins.
Then Mansel drew a bow at a venture and, observing
that he would have thought that rogues in Carinthia
were few, casually spoke of a tanner as the one
rustic we had met that had worn the look of a knave.
At once the hostess had let out a gush of abuse,
avowing that the man and his brother were the
black sheep of that part of the land, that her
husband knew them well, and had harboured one
for a fortnight when a warrant was out for his
arrest. <span class="it">On the last two days</span>, she added, <span class="it">the tanner
had come to the inn, and, despite her insistence that
her husband was away on a journey, had each time
stayed for some hours, as though in a hope of his
return. But on neither of those two days had the
closed car come, as it did from time to time, to take
up all manner of food.</span> And here she fell to raving
about the strangers’ score, by now amounting to
some seventy English pounds, of which not one
penny had been paid, declaring that here was
the proof that her husband’s union with the thieves
was something sinister, for that he was strict as
a bailiff where debts were concerned. “However,”
says she in the end, “no wind’s so ill that it blows
no scruple of good: for the strangers’ ways may
be evil, but the tanner’s are worse; and, at least,
my husband is out of some villainy, for, now that
the tanner has twice gone empty away, I do not
think he will return.”</p>

<p>Herein we hoped very much that the woman was
right: for, if the tanner’s discovery came to the
knowledge of the thieves, our valuable system of
reliefs would certainly be imperilled, if not destroyed,
to say nothing of the fact that they would instantly
know that we were driving a shaft.</p>

<p>I have shown already that, since our brush with
the tanner, we berthed the car each night at some
different place: but Mansel was not satisfied
with this precaution, and presently determined
that the relief should always begin at eleven o’clock,
and that, from ten o’clock onward, one of the four
in the dungeon should watch as much as he could
of the opposite shore. This may appear to have
been an idle exercise, because the sentry was too
distant to see or hear any movement which was
made in the danger zone: and I must confess that
I did not myself account it worth the expense of a
workman—for nowadays we laboured to all hours:
but Mansel had given the order, and so it was done.</p>

<p>We had always kept in the dungeon a supply of
tinned food, sufficient to last us some days: but
this stock we now increased, until, if the worst
came to pass, we could live for full three weeks
without leaving the <span class="it">oubliette</span>.</p>

<p>However, the days went by and no one troubled
us: if the tanner watched us again, we never saw
him: the soil at the foot of the gutter was sometimes
drenched, but never the marsh we had made
it: and, while the enemy’s labour was fitful, and
they had, I think, no concerted plan of action,
except to deny us the well, we continued to drive
our shaft forward with all our might.</p>

<p>And here let me say that we were by now the
owners of Wagensburg: for Ellis had let go his
option, and Mansel had purchased the place. But
I doubt if seigniory was ever so strangely enjoyed—the
freeholders having their being, like rats, in
the bowels of the earth, and in constant dread of
their presence being observed, and their enemies
in possession and coming and going and doing
just as they pleased.</p>

<hr />

<p>It was thirteen days to an hour since Tester had
bayed the tanner, and Bell and I were engaged at
the nose of the shaft, when I heard someone running
towards us, and, the next moment, Rowley’s voice.
Hanbury desired me, he said, to come to the
gallery at once.</p>

<p>Leaving Bell to put out the search-light and
follow me down, I immediately left for the gallery,
making what haste I could: but, after the glare of
the lamp, I was as good as blind, and the light of
the candles which were burning in the shaft and the
<span class="it">oubliette</span>, was too feeble to guide my steps.</p>

<p>However, at last I was down, to find Hanbury
at the middle embrasure, peering into the night.</p>

<p>His report was disquieting indeed.</p>

<p>“There’s someone across the river: I saw the
flash of a torch.”</p>

<p>I do not think either of us doubted that the fat
was now in the fire: for that anyone but one of
the thieves would be using an electric torch about
the quarry, or, indeed, for twenty miles round,
was most improbable.</p>

<p>The time was half past ten; and Mansel was
due to arrive at eleven o’clock.</p>

<p>Now where he would berth the Rolls we could
not tell, beyond that it would be at some place
within five hundred yards of the spot we had used
as a quay: but, since there were but two roads—the
one running South from Villach and into the
other, which followed the river along—for the thieves
to mark her arrival would be most easy; and, once
they had seen her stop and her occupants separate,
the most maladroit attack could hardly fail.</p>

<p>There was, therefore, but one thing to do, namely,
to try to reach Mansel before the Rolls had entered
the danger zone; and, since he was always punctual
yet never hurried, it was perfectly plain that, if
we were to be in time, we had not one moment to
lose.</p>

<p>In a twinkling, our plans were laid.</p>

<p>Hanbury, who was a good runner, was to make
the attempt: having swum the river and landed
a little down stream, he was to strike across country
and head for the Villach road. Bell and I were to
follow, but, when we had crossed the river, we
should approach the quarry and try to locate the
thieves, so that, if Hanbury failed, at least we
should be able to offer some other support. Rowley
was to be left in charge of the <span class="it">oubliette</span>.</p>

<p>Hanbury was gone in an instant, for he was
lightly clad and waited for nothing: but for Bell
and me to go unarmed would have been idle, and,
since we must wrap up our pistols to save them
from getting wet, we stripped and did the same
with our clothes, before descending the shoot.</p>

<p>We were soon across the water, and, having made
the bank at a place where a gurgling brook ran into
the river, were able to dress in its gully without
much apprehension of being seen or heard.</p>

<p>Indeed, the night itself was an invisible cloak:
I never remember darkness so impenetrable: and
there was not a breath of air.</p>

<p>I then did my best to consider what manner of
ambush the thieves would determine to lay, but
could only decide that the track which led to the
quarry and the junction of the two roads were, for
the moment, the two most probable points: we,
therefore, crossed the road and began to move
towards the junction, in the hope of hearing some
sound which would help us to a better understanding
of what was afoot. The track which
led to the quarry ran out of the Villach road.</p>

<p>We had come, so far as I could judge, to within
fifteen yards of the junction, when I heard the
murmur of a voice a little way off. I at once stood
still, the better to hear whence it came, but even
as I did so, it ceased. After straining my ears in
vain, I went cautiously on, to be instantly checked
by a rope, stretched breast-high across the road,
and stout enough to stop or disable a car that
sought to pass by. This discovery shook me, for
it showed that the thieves not only knew what to
expect, but intended to take no chance of losing
their prey. However, I was thankful to have
made it: and, since Bell had with him his
knife, we immediately severed the rope and let
it lie.</p>

<p>It now seemed certain that, if we went on, past
the junction, we should come to another rope, for
to bar but one of two doors would have been out
of reason: it was also equally clear that we had now
come to the verge of the danger zone, and that this
lay, roughly triangular, about the junction, with
its base running directly from rope to rope,
and its apex lying somewhere upon the Villach
road.</p>

<p>Since I had no plan of action, to open the road,
if we could, seemed plainly the first thing to do:
and, with this intent, we picked our way to the
river and started to hug its edge, in order to give
the junction as wide a berth as we could.</p>

<p>We had reached a point opposite the junction,
and, from where I was standing, I could see the
pale smear which the Villach road made upon the
black of the night, when I felt Bell’s fingers close
upon my arm. I suppose his grip was telltale, for,
though he breathed no word, in that instant I
certainly knew that the worst had happened, and
that <span class="it">Hanbury had lost his race</span>.</p>

<p>So we stood, still as death, for five seconds:
then I heard the brush of a tyre, as it rounded a
hairpin bend.</p>

<p>I have heard it said that, though the approach
of a crisis is apt to scatter the wits, its sudden
descent will sometimes whip them back into a
battle array. So it was with me at that moment:
for, though for a quarter of an hour I had been
groping feverishly, my disorder suddenly left me,
and I saw as clear as daylight what I must do.</p>

<p>At once I drew my pistol and fired twice across
the road.</p>

<p>I thought the consequent din would never die;
but at last the echoes faded, and we were able to
listen for lesser sounds.</p>

<p>The Rolls had stopped.</p>

<p>Now, though we had ruined the ambush, there
was still the devil to pay, for I knew the way was
too narrow to let the Rolls go about, and that to
reverse in such darkness along so crooked a road
was out of the question. But it suddenly came to
my mind that if Mansel were to switch on his headlights
and run for it towards Lerai, that is to say
<span class="it">turn to the left at the junction</span>, we should be out of
the wood; for the thieves would almost certainly
suffer the car to go by in the full expectation that
she would be wrecked by the rope. I, therefore,
decided to join Mansel as quickly as ever I could
and, whispering to Bell to follow, hastened across
the foreshore and on to the road.</p>

<p>Pitch-dark though it was, I dared not go directly
by way of the Villach road, and we had just started
back towards Lerai, when I heard the deep breath
of an engine, and then the Rolls coming, with the
rush of a mighty wind.</p>

<p>Mansel had divined the best course, and was
making his dash. And all would be well, <span class="it">provided
he turned to the left. If, at the junction, he turned to
the right instead</span> . . .</p>

<p>I know that for one long moment my heart stood
still.</p>

<p>Then, throwing caution to the winds, Bell and I
turned and raced for the second rope.</p>

<p>The junction was now bright as day, and the car
was so close that, had there been nothing to gain, I
should not have crossed its path, but have waited
for it to go by. I found myself praying that
Mansel would turn to the left. As he swooped at
the corner I ran clean into the rope, but the Rolls
was round and <span class="it">coming</span> before I had opened Bell’s
knife. I slashed at the rope like a madman, but
before I could cut it right through the car swept
by, and, ripping it out of my hand, mercifully
snapped asunder such strands as were left.</p>

<p>As we ran in the wake of the Rolls, I heard an
ejaculation and then a spurt of high words, but,
though I was sure I heard Ellis, I could not
distinguish ‘Rose’ Noble’s masterful voice.</p>

<p>The Rolls had vanished, and I was beginning to
wonder whether it would not be wiser to let Bell go
on, while I returned to see what the thieves were
doing and, if I could, meet Hanbury, when Mansel
rose out of the shadows and spoke my name.</p>

<p>I told him my tale.</p>

<p>“I’m much obliged,” he said quietly. “You
were up against time and the thieves, and you
beat them both. When I am so placed, I hope I
shall do as well. I think it likely that Hanbury
missed his way: it’s very hard to go straight on a
night like this. And that’s why we must get back.
Your shots will bring him to the junction, and we
don’t want an accident.”</p>

<p>With that, he showed us the boat and the sculls
in a ditch, and proposed to take to the water and
scull down stream. “For the way of a river,”
said he, “is swift and safe and silent, and I was a
fool not to have used it before.”</p>

<p>In this he was unfair to himself, for the relief
nowadays took up the best part of an hour, four
water-journeys having to be made each night:
and, if these journeys had been considerably
lengthened, we should have been worn out before
we could get to bed.</p>

<p>Then he told us that the Rolls was gone, and
would not come back that way; but that Carson
had orders to be at the culvert at three, and, if no
one of us came before four o’clock, to return to
Salzburg. Before he went, he would leave a note
wedged in the brickwork, to say he was safe, and,
when twenty-four hours had gone by, he would
come there again. So he would continue to do,
until one of us came to meet him or he found a note
under the arch.</p>

<p>“And now for Hanbury,” said Mansel: “and
then for the <span class="it">oubliette</span>.”</p>

<p>We slipped down the river noiselessly, and, when
we approached the bend, at a signal from Mansel,
Bell, who was rowing, rested upon his oars. We
could hear no sound at all, and, after drifting for a
moment, Mansel whispered to Bell to head for the
shoot.</p>

<p>So thick was the darkness that Bell, not
unnaturally, sculled to the side of the stream and,
when he could make out the bank, began to follow
this down.</p>

<p>We had just passed the slope of the woods and
come to the cliff, when a torch was flashed twice
from the bank five paces away. Before we could
think, came two flashes from the opposite side.</p>

<p>And that was all.</p>

<p>At once Bell lay on his oars: but, after
listening intently, Mansel bade him scull for the
shoot.</p>

<p>Almost at once we were there, and Mansel put
up a hand and rang the bell.</p>

<p>So soon as the flap was lifted:</p>

<p>“Listen, Rowley,” says Mansel, putting his
mouth to the shoot. “Is Mr. Hanbury with
you?”</p>

<p>“No, sir.”</p>

<p>“Have you anything to report?”</p>

<p>“Two flashes a moment ago, sir: but nothing
else.”</p>

<p>Mansel turned to me.</p>

<p>“William,” he said, “I don’t think we’re out
of the wood. To be perfectly honest, I’m altogether
at sea. I know neither what to do nor what to
think. But what bothers me most of all is—<span class="it">where
is ‘Rose’ Noble</span>? That being so, I’d rather you
held the fort. So you go up, and send Rowley
down to me. And then we’ll go and find George.”</p>

<p>I did not at all relish the prospect of garrison
duty at such a time; for, if trouble was coming,
to be mewed up within sound of the skirmish would
be well-nigh unbearable. But, since I had nothing
to plead but my own reluctance, I stripped with
what haste I could, and, two minutes later, Rowley
had taken my place.</p>

<p>The night was so dark and so still that, for a
moment, I thought the windows were shuttered,
and was stupidly astonished to find the timbers
gone: and, when I looked out, I might have been
gazing into a bottomless pit. However, I took my
seat in the middle embrasure and, cupping my
chin in my palm, stared resolutely into the darkness,
with my ears pricked to gather the faintest sound.
But all I could hear was the regular lap of the water
against the face of the cliff.</p>

<p>It had all along been in my mind that Mansel
and Hanbury would cross: and, when, but a short
five minutes after the former had left, the bell
from the shoot announced the latter’s return, I
was less surprised than provoked by this well-worn
trick of Fortune: for there was Mansel gone out
on a sleeveless errand into the midst of some danger
he could not read, and that at a time when the last
thing we needed to do was to play the spy and
everything was to be gained by lying close below
ground.</p>

<p>However, the milk was spilt: and, since to tread
water is a laborious exercise, I lost no time in
setting aside the flap and letting the ladder down.</p>

<p>It was immediately clear that George was very
near spent, for, when I called to him he had not
the breath to answer and when at last he was
fairly upon the ladder, he hung there, panting, like
a dog on a sultry day. I asked if I should come
down, but he took no notice, and, after a little while,
he began to ascend. I was alarmed by his
demeanour, which was that of the survivor of some
catastrophe, and, squatting down at the head of
the ladder, reached out my hands to help him
out of the shoot.</p>

<p>Now, I had intended to set my hands under his
arms, but the moment I touched him he threw
an arm round my neck. To save myself from falling
I instinctively flung myself back and, since in that
instant he heaved, the two of us fell down together
on to the flags.</p>

<p>“Thanks very much,” said ‘Rose’ Noble.</p>

<p>Then I felt the mouth of a pistol pressed tight
against my throat.</p>

<hr />

<p>I can never describe the disgust and the horror
I felt: but the brain is a curious member, and, as
I lay there on the pavement, with the bulk of his
body upon me, I could not help thinking that
‘Rose’ Noble’s ascent of the shoot was a remarkable
feat for a man of his corpulent habit, and
wondering how he had made it without the support
of an oath.</p>

<p>He was lightly clad, but the clothes he was
wearing were drenched; and the absurd conceit
that I was in the clutches of some aquatic monster
was most repugnant. Nevertheless, I had the
sense to lie still: and, after a little, ‘Rose’ Noble
got to his knees.</p>

<p>For a moment he fumbled: then the bright eye
of a torch illumined the chamber.</p>

<p>At this my heart leaped up, for, had he desired
to apprise Mansel of his entry, he could not have
found a surer or swifter way; for all the three
windows were open, and their sudden radiance was
bound to publish my plight.</p>

<p>‘Rose’ Noble got to his feet and bade me do
the same. I was glad to obey. Then he stepped
back and looked about him.</p>

<p>“So,” he said, after a while. Then he leaned
forward and spoke down the shoot. “Bunch.”</p>

<p>“Hullo,” said Bunch from below.</p>

<p>“You saw me ring that bell?”</p>

<p>“Yes,” said Bunch.</p>

<p>“Fetch Ellis and Job over here. When you’re
back, ring three times.”</p>

<p>“Right-o.”</p>

<p>‘Rose’ Noble straightened his back.</p>

<p>“Pull up that ladder,” he said.</p>

<p>“Not on your life,” said I. “You’ve come to
the wrong house.”</p>

<p>I could hardly see him, for the light was full in
my face: but I felt his eyes upon mine.</p>

<p>At length he took a deep breath.</p>

<p>Then:</p>

<p>“Stand back,” he said, thickly.</p>

<p>I did so, folding my arms.</p>

<p>At once he straddled the shoot, and, putting the
torch in his teeth, with his free hand felt for the
ladder and pulled it up. Then he picked up the
flap and sank this into its place.</p>

<p>This show of strength surprised me, for the flap
was very heavy, and I would never have believed
that a man so fat and flabby could have made
light of such a task.</p>

<p>‘Rose’ Noble took the torch from his mouth
and leaned his back against the wall.</p>

<p>“When Ellis comes,” said he, “I shall ask you
to show us around. I like to think that you will
grant that request.” I said nothing, and after a
moment he continued slowly enough. “Nobody
likes getting stuck: but, when he’s stuck good and
proper, the wise guy swallows his dose. And now,
listen to me, you young fool. I’ve taken possession
here, <span class="it">and here I stay</span>: so long as I stay, Mansel
will remain outside: he’s very welcome to get up
that drain—if he can; but, short of the ladder, I
don’t believe he’ll try. If he wants the well, he
can have it: but I rather fancy he’ll be thinking
more about you—they say blood’s thicker than
water . . . Well, he’s welcome to think. If he
asks me, <span class="it">I haven’t seen you: I found the ladder
waiting and came right up</span>.”</p>

<p>“D’you think he’ll believe you?” said I.</p>

<p>“Why not?” said ‘Rose’ Noble.</p>

<p>I had no answer to make, for, as I spoke, I saw
the force of his words. Here truth was stranger
than fiction: and Mansel would never believe that
I had handed him in.</p>

<p>“And so,” said ‘Rose’ Noble quietly, “I
guess we can count Mansel out.”</p>

<p>“Don’t you believe it,” said I. “He’s made
rings round you in the past, and he’ll do it again.”</p>

<p>“Maybe he will,” said ‘Rose’ Noble. “But
unless and until he does, I reckon <span class="it">it’s up to you</span>.”</p>

<p>“Indubitably,” said I.</p>

<p>‘Rose’ Noble sighed.</p>

<p>“No fool like a young fool,” he said. Then he
leaned forward. “Why put me up, when you
haven’t a card in your hand?”</p>

<p>I shrugged my shoulders.</p>

<p>“Much cry, but little wool,” said I. “Come to
the point. Are you trying to do a deal?”</p>

<p>“Yes,” said ‘Rose’ Noble. “I am. Maybe
it’s a shade one-sided; but you gave it that name.”
He jerked his torch at the ramp which led to the
<span class="it">oubliette</span>. “I’ve yet to see these diggings; but I
haven’t played ‘King o’ the Castle’ for a whole
raft of years, and I guess it’ll save us all time if you
give me the book of the rules. In return, I offer
you a painless captivity, a hell of a lot of
hard work, and a free pass-out three days after
we touch.”</p>

<p>I laughed.</p>

<p>“It is one-sided,” said I, as cheerfully as I could.</p>

<p>“These sort of deals often are,” was the grim
reply.</p>

<p>I could not think what to do.</p>

<p>I was unarmed, for I had left my pistol for Rowley
when he had taken my place: the other fire-arms
hung upon a wall of the chamber, all of them
loaded, but all of them out of my reach. Yet,
had they lain by my side, the fellow had me in
check; and I knew that, were I to move, he would
shoot me down. For all that, my case was nothing
to what it must be when Ellis and Job were come.
Till then, at least, we were but man to man: but,
if ‘Rose’ Noble was able to bring but one of them
up, I was as good as lost: and so was our enterprise.
That I must, therefore, take action before they
could enter the shoot was very evident, and I
saw at once that when he went to admit them was
the moment to make my attempt. His torch, of
course, was his blessing, and my unspeakable
curse: but for this we should have been better
matched, for, though he had his pistol, I knew my
way about and was, indeed, accustomed to moving
in the gallery without any light. I, therefore,
determined, something desperately, that, when he
stooped for the flap, by hook or by crook I must
dash the torch from his mouth, and, if I could not
there and then follow up this assault, at least to
jump to one side and so out of his ken.</p>

<p>And here it came to me that, so far as his torch
was concerned, my luck was indeed dead out;
for if ever any one of us went up or down the shoot
without saving his torch from the water, whether
because he forgot it or took the chance, so surely
that torch was useless and would give no glimmer
of light until it had been looked to and its battery
changed.</p>

<p>So we stood, with the flap between us, I trying to
watch ‘Rose’ Noble behind the glare of the
torch, he with his eyes upon mine, and both of us,
I fancy, awaiting the throb of the bell.</p>

<p>At length:</p>

<p>“Well,” said ‘Rose’ Noble.</p>

<p>I moistened my lips.</p>

<p>“There’s nothing doing,” said I. “Of course,
you can do me in, but it won’t help you. For one
thing, I’m not going to talk: for another, I’ve
nothing to say, for—believe me or not, as you
please—it’s Mansel and Hanbury together that
do the sums. You talk about guys that get stuck:
why, you’ve never been anything else. You’ve
been stuck at the top of the well——”</p>

<p>“See here,” said ‘Rose’ Noble thickly, “when
I want a —— lecture, I’ll let you know. Meantime
I’ll give you a hunch: and that is, <span class="it">get right with
God</span>.” The man’s hand was shaking: and I think
this angered him, for he let out a frightful oath.
“You say you’re not going to talk,” he continued
presently. “Well, <span class="it">there’s your right eye gone</span>. I
don’t set up for a surgeon, but my hand don’t
always shake, and an inch of red-hot wire makes a
nice, clean job. And, maybe, when you’re short
of a light, you’ll find your tongue: it’s not an
operation you’ll find in the medical books, but,
by ——, <span class="it">I’ve known it work</span>.”</p>

<p>I suppose that the monster saw that his words
had shocked me—as, indeed, to be honest, they had;
for, while they were dreadful enough, the meaning
with which he spoke them was unmistakable:
at any rate he laughed hideously—the fat laugh
of a satyr, that made my blood run cold.</p>

<p>And, as he laughed, the light of his torch went
out.</p>

<p>We were both of us taken by surprise: but for
this particular accident he, I imagine, was more
unready than I, and, though he fired, he was an
instant too late, for I had taken my chance and
leaped to the right.</p>

<p>The crash of the explosion covered what noise
I made, and, before the racket was over, I was at
the foot of the ramp, straining my ears.</p>

<p>I heard him grope for my body and curse when he
found me gone. The next moment he fired again,
and the bullet parted my hair. He must have
fired at a venture; but so good was the shot that it
seemed as though he could see, and I turned and
fled up the ramp, like a startled hare.</p>

<p>Now, before I had taken ten steps, I saw the faint
glow of the candles alight in the <span class="it">oubliette</span>: these I
had clean forgotten, but now in a flash I knew that
I could not have made a more unfortunate move,
for, having escaped from one light, here I was
making my way towards another. To make matters
worse, as I perceived my mistake, I missed my
footing and fell, making the deuce of a noise: and
in an instant I heard ‘Rose’ Noble behind.</p>

<p>There was now nothing for it but to go on up the
ramp, for this was far too narrow for me to let him
go by: indeed, I fully expected that he would
fire again, but I suppose he was minded to husband
his shots. I, therefore, went rapidly on and had
just decided to make a dash for the candles and
put them out, if I could, before ‘Rose’ Noble
could reach the <span class="it">oubliette</span>, when he let out a “Ha”
of triumph, which showed me that he had viewed
the glimmer ahead.</p>

<p>Now the slightest reflection would have told me
that, moving from him to the glow, which was
actually framed by the postern at the head of the
ramp, I was offering such a target as no marksman
could very well miss; and I think he must surely
have been upon the edge of bringing me down, when
the bell from the shoot was rung. Perhaps he held
his hand to hear if it rang again: but, if so, he lost
his chance, for I suddenly perceived my folly and
fell on my face. As I did so, the bell rang again:
and then a third time.</p>

<p>At once ‘Rose’ Noble began to descend the
ramp.</p>

<p>There was but one thing to do, and that was to
follow him down. Once Ellis and Job were in, my
race was as good as run. So down I went, moving
beneath the shelter of the noise that he made—for
till you had the way of it the descent of the ramp
was a difficult exercise—and racking my brain for
some fair opportunity of giving battle.</p>

<p>The rifles and, certainly, two pistols were hanging
upon the West wall, that is to say, about three feet
from the shoot: we kept them there on purpose
that they might be always convenient to anyone
leaving the chamber: but, for me, they could
not have hung in a more unfortunate place, and I
could not think how to reach them without ‘Rose’
Noble’s knowledge that I was at hand.</p>

<p>Suddenly my heart leaped, and I thought of the
wood.</p>

<p>At the eastern end of the gallery lay some timber,
for we had not carried it all into the <span class="it">oubliette</span>; and,
though a joist was plainly a clumsy weapon to ply
within four walls, I was cheered by the thought that
it was also a formidable arm and possessed the clear
advantage of a considerable range.</p>

<p>I, therefore, made haste to come down to the
foot of the ramp, but, as I gained the chamber, I
heard ‘Rose’ Noble setting aside the flap. How
he had been so quick I cannot tell, but I saw in an
instant that, if I was to dispute the entrance of
Ellis and Job, I had not a second to lose. As I
groped for the timber, I heard the ladder go down,
and at that moment I touched a case of tinned food.
This was open. Without waiting to think, I picked
up a tin—what it contained I know not; but I
think it was fruit—and hurled it with all my might
at where ‘Rose’ Noble must be. I know that it
hit him, for he let out a cry of pain: but, before he
could fire, I had flung another tin.</p>

<p>The case was full, and I had discharged five tins
before I heard him coming with a volley of oaths.
Instantly I whipped to the ramp and, as he went
by, darted to the opposite wall. In a moment I
had a pistol and, as he fired into the timber, I
jerked up the ladder and, thrusting my arm into
the shoot itself, fired directly into the water below.
That this would discourage Ellis I felt very sure;
and, since he had no instructions except to ring
the bell, he could hardly be blamed, if, after such
a reception, he beat a retreat. But there was still
‘Rose’ Noble: and I knew very well that, though
I had prevented his fellows, I had done so at the
price of provoking most deeply the wrath of this
terrible man. And, indeed, in a moment I heard a
sound which told me that what had gone by was a
skirmish and that the battle <span class="it">à outrance</span> was just
about to begin. I heard the long, heavy breathing
of a man who is out to kill.</p>

<p>I had never heard it before: but it is a sound as
fearful as it is expressive; and I must honestly
confess that, when I heard it, I was frightened to
death. However, I tried to take heart by thinking
that the odds were in my favour, for now we both
were armed and I was not only the more agile, but
knew our surroundings as the palm of my hand.</p>

<p>My first impulse was to fire in that direction
from which the breathing came: but then I saw that
the flash of my pistol would betray me and that,
unless I hit him, before I could move, he would
return my shot. And there, of course, he had the
advantage of me: for, while I knew little of fire-arms,
beyond that they must be handled with
infinite care, ‘Rose’ Noble gave the impression
of being as ready with a pistol as are most men with
a pen. Yet, strange as it seems, I found his bullets
far less dreadful than his presence itself, and the
thought that he must be approaching pricked me
to make a move.</p>

<p>The first thing I did was to stumble upon the
flap, and at once I heard him move forward towards
the shoot. Instinctively, I shrank back, to find
myself in the corner of the North and West walls.
How I had missed the shoot I do not know, but
there it was at my feet: I could feel its current of
air.</p>

<p>If I did not move now, I was lost—that is to say
unless I could kill my man: for I was literally
cornered, and, if ‘Rose’ Noble came on, he would,
any moment now, cut off my escape. I, therefore,
stole to my left and had come to the first embrasure,
some five feet away, when something swept past
my chin and, then, lightly touching the wall on my
left, sailed horizontally back, missing me this time
by a hair’s breadth.</p>

<p>Again I recoiled, thus making my second mistake,
for an instant later I knew he had picked up a
helve and with this was sweeping the chamber to
find me out. The moment the helve had sailed back
I should have advanced: but I had let the
chance go.</p>

<p>I was now fairly back in my corner, when again
I heard the helve touch—this time the wall on my
right. This to my horror, for it showed that the
cast which ‘Rose’ Noble was making was almost
done and that in four or five seconds the fellow’s
terrible instinct would have its reward.</p>

<p>I, therefore, dropped on one knee and set my left
hand on the flags, the better to steady my aim:
but I knew that the odds were against me, because
the moment he touched me he would know where
to fire, whilst I could not possibly tell to within
some two or three feet.</p>

<p>‘Rose’ Noble moved like a cat, giving no sound.
Only the helve touched again, this time very close.
I could hear the lap of the water and feel the air
from the shoot flirting my face. And then, all of
a sudden, I saw a bare chance of escape.</p>

<p>The flap when sunk into place, lay flush with the
pavement, and so was supported by a ledge running
around the shoot, cut out of the stone. This ledge
was two inches in width—wide enough to give
handhold to a desperate man.</p>

<p>Hardly waiting to pocket my pistol, I entered the
shoot, and a moment later I was altogether out of
the gallery, yet able to re-enter at will, hanging by
my hands from the ledge, staring up into the chamber
to mark what I could.</p>

<p>I heard ‘Rose’ Noble above me, tapping all
around with the helve: I could hear his breathing
quite close, and something wet fell from him on
to my upturned face. This was blood: so I knew
that I must have cut him with one of the tins.
Suddenly I heard him stiffen and hold his breath.
Then he turned round; and, as in a theatre, by some
trick of production to pretend the coming of dawn,
you may see the forms of men grow gradually out
of the darkness, so <span class="it">I saw the monster begin to take
shape</span>.</p>

<p>He was standing crouched, with his knees well
bent and his left leg a little advanced: his great
head was up and his jaw jutted out like a peak: in
his left hand he held the helve and in his right was
his pistol, pointed and ready to fire: his pistol arm
was crooked and steady as any rock.</p>

<p>He had but to drop his eyes for them to light upon
me: but he did not, keeping them fixed, instead,
upon what I judged must be the foot of the ramp.</p>

<p>All this I saw at first dimly, but gradually more
and more clear, to my great astonishment; for
the effect was magical, and I could think of no
earthly explanation.</p>

<p>Then in a flash my brain cleared, and I knew it
for the work of the search-light, which Mansel or
Hanbury was carrying down the ramp. They must
have entered the dungeon by way of the trap and,
hearing no sound from the gallery, were hastening
thither in a concern for me which could wait upon
no risks.</p>

<p>And here was I out of action: and there was
‘Rose’ Noble, like a fowler, watching a bird
come down into his snare.</p>

<p>There was only one thing to be done.</p>

<p>“Look out! ‘Rose’ Noble!” I yelled, and let
myself go.</p>

<p>It was a rough passage and cost me a lot of skin:
but, of course, I fell down like a stone and was, I
suppose, under water before ‘Rose’ Noble had
recovered from his surprise. For he never fired.</p>

<p>A moment later I was swimming down stream.</p>

<p>And that was the end of my adventure; for I had
hardly landed upon the castle side, when out of
the forest came Rowley and asked me if I was
unhurt.</p>

<p>At first I thought I was dreaming, but he said
that he had come straight from the staircase-turret,
after letting the others into the <span class="it">oubliette</span>. His
orders were to put back the slabs, destroy every
trace of their removal and then lie close in the woods
till break of day. He was then to cross the river,
and, if he saw a towel in a window, to come to the
shoot.</p>

<p>But I would not wait so long, because I feared
that, finding me gone, when he had dispatched
‘Rose’ Noble, Mansel would go out in my quest.
So, since the boat was at hand, we at once sculled
back to the shoot and there, sure enough, met
Mansel about to go out after Rowley and then
after me.</p>

<p>“Are you hurt?” said he at once.</p>

<p>“Not a scratch,” said I. “Where’s ‘Rose’
Noble?”</p>

<p>“Up stream, I think,” said Mansel, climbing into
the boat.</p>

<p>Then he bade me go up to the gallery and expect
him and Rowley again in ten minutes’ time. When
I asked him where he was going, he said, “To
bestow the boat.”</p>

<p>When I was up in the chamber, I was not surprised
that he had asked me if I was hurt, for, though
there was little disorder, blood was all over the
place. We afterwards learned that this came from
‘Rose’ Noble’s head, which I had cut open—most
likely with the first tin I threw. And this shows
how tough the man was, for all his grossness: for
the tin must have weighed three pounds, and I
flung it with all my might.</p>

<p>Hanbury had little to tell, beyond that, as Mansel
surmised, he had lost his way in the dark and,
horrified at hearing my shots, had made at once for
the junction to see what was there toward. There he
had found Ellis and Job and the tanner and another
he did not know. Ellis was raving about the escape
of the Rolls and vowing most shocking vengeance
against whosoever it was that had cut the ropes;
and the four then appeared to be watching the road
and the river, in observance of some design he could
not comprehend. He had seen the two flashes
from the woods, as also had they; and it was Job
who had at once repeated the signal. Not long
after that, the windows of the gallery had suddenly
been illumined, to Hanbury’s horror and the great
surprise of the thieves, who seemed too much dumbfounded
to utter a word, though the tanner and his
fellow let out at once a flood of excited talk. Then
Hanbury had left them, to hasten in fear and
trembling down to the water’s edge, where he had
run into Mansel, himself hot-foot for the boat.</p>

<p>And there, when Mansel returned, he took up
the tale.</p>

<p>“ ‘Rose’ Noble was in a boat, moored in mid-stream.
I believe he was there all the time. In
his eyes the Rolls was a plum, of which he would
have been very glad: but our pit-head was the very
pie itself. So Ellis was given the job of taking the
Rolls: but ‘Rose’ Noble took on the business
of locating and seizing the pit-head.</p>

<p>“It was Punter, I imagine, that heard us, as
we were sculling down stream, and gave the signal
which Hanbury saw Job repeat.</p>

<p>“ ‘Rose’ Noble must have been beside us,
whilst you, Chandos, went up and Rowley came
down. But, being as shrewd as they make ’em, he
held his hand.</p>

<p>“So much for speculation.</p>

<p>“I’ve had some shocks in my life, but the sight
of those windows lighted hit me between the
eyes.</p>

<p>“We made enough noise embarking to be heard
for a furlong or more, but Ellis and Co., I suppose,
had no ears to hear. There was no room for Rowley,
but he laid hold of the painter and swam behind.</p>

<p>“We missed friend Bunch by inches. I suppose
he had lost his direction, for he was sculling down
stream. So we came to the shoot. When I saw
this was shut, I decided to go for the trap as fast
as we could.</p>

<p>“We dropped down stream and landed below the
road of approach. I’m afraid we must have broken
all Punter’s ‘marks,’ but that couldn’t be helped.
Whilst I was forcing the door of the kitchen-hall,
George and Rowley ran to the well for rope. They
were back with a coil and a blanket before Bell and
I had withdrawn the second slab.</p>

<p>“When we were down, we could hear no sound
at all. The light we had seen was gone, and I don’t
mind admitting that I was deeply concerned.
Now a torch always makes you a target; yet I
felt I must have light: so I sent Bell off for the
search-light without more ado.</p>

<p>“What then happened you know. But for your
warning, Chandos, ‘Rose’ Noble must have shot
me dead.</p>

<p>“As it was, the tables were turned.</p>

<p>“Hanbury sat down in the ramp with the search-light
between his knees: and I took my stand behind
him, ready to fire.</p>

<p>“I fancy ‘Rose’ Noble knew that the game was
up.</p>

<p>“To bring us within his range, he was bound to
enter the beam: and the moment he entered the
beam: he would be certainly blinded and almost
certainly shot.</p>

<p>“By way of rubbing this in, I audibly requested
Hanbury to advance a couple of feet.</p>

<p>“A moment later I heard him go down the shoot.”</p>

<p>Whilst we were eating some supper, I told my
tale over again: but, when Hanbury and I would
have discussed the future, Mansel checked us with
a yawn.</p>

<p>Then he laughed.</p>

<p>“ ‘Sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof.’
‘Rose’ Noble has gone far enough towards
murdering sleep. Don’t let us finish it off.”</p>

<p>Then he told Bell to lay his bed, when he made it,
across the flap of the shoot.</p>

<p>“I don’t see how they can lift it,” he added
slowly: “but to-night has shown me that I don’t
know a risk when I see one, so from now on I’m
going to turn every stone.”</p>

<p>And then and there I happened to look at my
watch. At first I made sure it had stopped,
but, when I had checked it with Hanbury’s, I found
it was telling the time. This was five minutes to
twelve. And since we had been at supper for half
an hour, my passage with “Rose” Noble cannot
have taken up more than ten or twelve minutes of
time. And that, but for its proof, I never would
have believed.</p>

<p>Soon the lights were put out, and we lay down to
take our rest: but for an hour or more I could not
slumber for thinking of those ten or twelve minutes
and how close to death I had come.</p>

<p>And here let me say I was sorry for ‘Rose’
Noble: for, unconscionable villain though he was,
he deserved to have won that trick. To enter the
gallery, as he did, was a great accomplishment, and,
but for the failure of his torch, he must, I think,
have brought us all to our knees. Yet, all he got
for his valour was a broken head.</p>

<div><span class="pageno" title="248" id="Page_248"></span><h1>CHAP. VIII       THE RACE FOR THE CHAMBER</h1></div>

<p class="noindent"><span class="lead-in">The</span> next morning we held a short council.</p>

<p>The system of reliefs, which had served us so
long and so well, was now a thing of the past: and
we were all agreed that, once we had closed our
bases, except to communicate with Carson or to go
out as a spy, no one must leave the dungeon until
the treasure was won.</p>

<p>That the stranger whom Hanbury had seen was
the tanner’s brother we had no doubt, and, to judge
from the fellow’s demeanour, so far as we were
concerned, the two were at one with the thieves:
if this were so, since they were the innkeeper’s allies,
our enemies now numbered eight, instead of five.</p>

<p>Yet, neither of these conclusions troubled us
near so much as the thought that ‘Rose’ Noble
must know that there was a second entrance into
the <span class="it">oubliette</span>. This was a serious matter: for, now
that he knew, he would not rest till he had found it,
and, as if that were not enough, we had left him a
definite clue. Rowley had covered our tracks as
best he could, but he could not repair the door
which Mansel had forced: its broken condition
the thieves were bound to remark, and, the instant
they saw it, they would know that the entrance they
sought led out of the castle itself. “And so,”
said Mansel, “It’s only a matter of time. It may
take them a day or an hour: but in the end they’ll
find it, and then the balloon will go up.”</p>

<p>Now, if we guarded the trap, though they found
it, to force an entry that way might be very hard,
for three men armed, in the darkness, could hold it
against an army, similarly equipped. But what a
man has done once, he will do again; and we had
little doubt that, if we opposed their entry, they
would at once resort to the use of that terrible
weapon which they had already employed, that is
to say, of bombs: and stand up to these we could
not, if for no other reason, because against such an
attack no man born of woman could hope to hold
such a place. We could bar the postern of nights,
we could set an electric alarum above the stile, we
could keep watch: but more we could not do, and
must try the fortune of war when the moment came.
But Mansel decided that in future we must always
go armed, even though we were working at the nose
of the shaft.</p>

<p>It was then arranged that the next morning I
should go to the culvert, and, taking the Rolls from
Carson, send him back to the dungeon and myself
drive to St. Martin for the last time.</p>

<p>“You see,” said Mansel, “at the moment we’re
not up against Time: but I shouldn’t be surprised
if we were, before the curtain comes down. Give
me five minutes’ start, and I’ll be at Calais five
hours before ‘Rose’ Noble: but not if I’ve got to
trip round, paying my bills. So we’ll do three
more reliefs. When you’ve bade farewell to St.
Martin, Hanbury can visit Villach; and then I can
go to Salzburg and make all smooth and clear for
us to withdraw. I think we should each go alone,
because four’s none too many to hold the fort. And
I think we’ll have Tester here: he’ll rather like
this place, and he’ll be devilish useful, watching
that trap.”</p>

<p>With that we talked no more, but went to work,
Mansel and Hanbury to setting the electric alarum,
and Rowley and Bell and I to driving the shaft.</p>

<p>Thirteen days had gone by since we had altered
our course, and so well had we wrought in this time
that but twenty-three yards lay between us and what
we had come to call “live ground.” We gave it
that name, because, though we knew it was
surrounding the chamber, as a garden a house, we
were far less certain where within it the chamber
lay. We hoped and believed that, by holding
straight on through this region, we should strike
some part of the chamber before we had gone five
yards: we were equally sure that, if we had not
found it in nine, this would be because we had
passed it; and, in such an event, we proposed to
go no further, but to drive a new shaft at right
angles through the middle of the live ground. We
had made up our minds that this region was not
more than nine yards square, and we steadfastly
refused to consider that somewhere within its area
the chamber did not lie.</p>

<p>Whether the progress we made was actually
swift or slow I cannot fairly pronounce, for how
six sextons would have fared, had they been set
such a task, I cannot say. But what we lacked
in experience, I think we made up in zeal: and,
after all, digging is a simple, downright business,
which one man, if he will, can soon do as well as
another. Be that as it may, I do not think any
men could have laboured more heartily than we
had, since our brush with the tanner upon the
ninth night of June. But now, since our life was
to be less easy, we determined to cut our confinement
as short as ever we could and to that end to redouble
our efforts to reach our goal. We had not much
hope of so doing before the thieves discovered the
trap: but there was a chance that we might, and,
faint though it was, this certainly spurred us on,
for, although we were ready enough to show our
teeth, once such a battle was joined, no one could
possibly tell what the outcome would be.</p>

<p>And there, of course, the thieves had a valuable
advantage: for, if one of them was wounded, the
others would let him lie or die for want of attention,
rather than care for him to the cost of their enterprise:
but, if one of us was hurt and needed a
doctor’s aid, everything else, of course, would go
by the board.</p>

<p>In this sense the dice were loaded: and, though
hitherto we had been most fortunate, this spectre
always haunted each passage of arms that
we had.</p>

<p>Full of these thoughts, we worked as hard as
we could, and by the end of that day had actually
advanced five yards, so that but eighteen remained
between us and the live ground.</p>

<p>At one o’clock the next morning I left for the
culvert, charged by Mansel to swim down the middle
of the river and not to attempt to land for a quarter
of a mile. I was then to strike across country and
by no means to use the road, until I had left the
junction two miles behind. Directly I had found
Carson I was to send him back, for else it would be
broad daylight before he could reach the shoot.
“Indeed,” said Mansel, “I’m banking on your
meeting by half past two, for Carson is sure to be
early and so, I think, are you, for the culvert is
less than four miles as the crow flies. Tell him on
no account to let Tester off the lead and to hold
the end in his mouth as he swims to the shoot.”</p>

<p>I was at the culvert at half past two and had just
found the note which Carson had lodged in the
brickwork under the arch, when I heard a step above
me, and there he was.</p>

<p>Two minutes later he and Tester were gone, and
I was turning the Rolls.</p>

<p>There was little to do at St. Martin, except to
collect my belongings and pay my bill. But I had
to explain how it was that I came a day late and
alone and without the basket which my hostess had
so often put up. I might have found this hard;
but, between their relief to see me and their distress
to learn that I should return no more, the good
people seemed to have no room left for surprise.
Indeed, I might have been a fugitive monarch,
resting at the house of a loyal before resuming his
flight, for they could not do enough to show their
esteem and goodwill. And, when at last I left them,
I had to give them my word that I would one day
come back, and, even so, enough honest tears were
shed to make me feel ashamed that I had imposed so
much on their simplicity.</p>

<p>Hanbury met me at the culvert, but had nothing
at all to report, save that another five yards had
been added to the length of the shaft. And, by the
time he was back on the following day, we were
within eight yards of the live ground.</p>

<p>We were all glad of Tester: and Tester was glad
of us. He soon understood that, when there was no
one to spare, he was expected to guard the <span class="it">oubliette</span>,
and I think he enjoyed wandering about in the
darkness—for now we burned no lights, except in
the gallery and at the nose of the shaft—and
conducting an endless scrutiny of the great banks of
earth. The shoot seemed to fascinate him, and he
always contrived to be present, when its flap was
withdrawn. I fancy he thought that it must have
been made by some beast and was continually
hoping that its creator would emerge.</p>

<p>When Carson took his leave, I could not help
wondering when we should see him again: for, with
Mansel’s return, the last of our reliefs would be over,
and, if all went well, the next time we crossed the
river would be the last. He was very loth to leave
us and constantly lamented that he had not killed
‘Rose’ Noble on the night when we visited the
well. “One minute more,” he would say, “and
I should have had him cold. And that would have
saved us a peck of trouble, sir; for, if ever I saw
one, there goes a dangerous man.”</p>

<p>Be sure I agreed with him. And yet I must
honestly confess that, if we had suddenly learned
that the thieves had withdrawn, the game would
have lost a curiously attractive savour, which even
the lifting of the treasure would not have wholly
restored. For danger, once you have tasted it, is a
superlative spice.</p>

<p>If Carson was loth to go, we were sorry enough
to lose him, for he was a fine workman and a first-class
shot. What was more, he had the brain of
a fighter and, though there might be no one to lead
him, could be trusted to think for himself and to
hold his own.</p>

<p>However, neither Rowley nor Bell could manage
a car as could he; besides which, it was good to
know that our line of retreat was held by such
capable hands.</p>

<p>His instructions were clear.</p>

<p>So soon as he reached Salzburg he was to lay up
the Rolls and, taking the second car, drive her to
Villach. There he was to bestow her at the inn
which Hanbury had used, and then to return by
train in search of the Rolls. After that he was to
go no more to Salzburg, but to take up his quarters
at Villach, holding both cars in condition to leave at
an instant’s notice by day or night. Each night at
eleven o’clock he was to be at the culvert and,
having concealed the Rolls, to wait there till twelve.
He was then to walk to a point a mile and a half
away, where seven trees grew together on the top
of a hill. From here could be seen the castle and
a slice of the river below. If he saw nothing
unusual, he was to go his way: if he saw one window
lighted, he was to return to the culvert and wait till
we came: if he saw two illumined, he was to leave
the Rolls and come to the shoot: but, if all three
were aglow, he was to get the Rolls and drive down,
past the junction and on to the Lerai road.</p>

<p>We had little to report to Mansel, beyond that
our progress had been slow. For, since he had left,
we had only advanced three yards, because we had
encountered a boulder as big as a sheep, the dislodgment
and disposal of which had taken the best part
of five hours. But, if, instead of progressing, we
had actually retired, I do not think Mansel would
have cared, because he was so much relieved to
find that the secret of the trap was still inviolate
and that we had not, in his absence, been called
upon to fight for our lives.</p>

<p>That day we made a great effort; and by eight
o’clock that evening we had reached the coveted
region and had broken the live ground.</p>

<p>Our excitement now began to run high, and I was
for bolting my supper, in order to get back to work:
but Mansel said he should like to visit the combe,
and me to go with him.</p>

<p>“It may seem idle,” he said: “but those who
don’t look don’t see. To visit the well or the castle
would take more time than I think we can fairly
spare: but to go to the combe and back will take us
less than an hour. I hope and believe it will be
our last reconnaissance, but I think we ought to
make it before we take off our coats for the final
push.”</p>

<p>And so we went out together, when it was dark.</p>

<p>Hanbury told me later that, when we returned,
Mansel was rather pale, but I looked an older man.
I have no doubt I did: for, though we had seen no
one and heard no sound, what we had found was
enough to age any man who thinks the fruits of his
labour worth taking up.</p>

<p><span class="it">At the foot of the gutter we had found a miniature
lake.</span></p>

<hr />

<p>Now, whilst we were drawing water, we had never
gone down to see the pool we had made, and,
though we all remembered the sodden condition of the
ground on the day I was taken by Ellis, that was
nothing to go by, for then no water had been drawn
for eighteen or twenty hours. We had, therefore,
the bare fact before us that the enemy was making
for the first time a truly formidable effort to empty
the well—a feat which we had accomplished in less
than three days. How long they had been at work,
how much water they had drawn, how the results
of their labour were comparing with those of ours
we could not so much as guess: <span class="it">but what six men had
done eight men could do</span>; and this indisputable
verity, sternly illustrated by the lake at the foot
of the combe, bade fair to sap the resolution from
which our endeavours sprang.</p>

<p>I can only speak for myself, but I know that,
when I was back in the gallery, I felt tired and was
glad to sit down and that, when Bell brought me
dry shoes, the business of changing seemed a
burden and I told him to put them down and
let me be.</p>

<p>Then I heard Mansel laugh.</p>

<p>“ ‘Rose’ Noble leads,” he said lightly. “And
yet I’ll back the old firm. There’s the straight to
be covered yet, and I fancy they’re full of running.
Besides, I don’t know how you fellows feel, but I
haven’t shovelled dirt for six weeks for the pleasure
of watching ‘Rose’ Noble pick my peach. Then
again, the game’s the thing.</p>

<p>“And now let’s see where we stand.</p>

<p>“As yet they’ve not got to the shaft. That is
clear, for that water was drawn to-day, but the gutter
was dry: which means they’ve stopped work for
the night. If it was over, and they’d found, there
wouldn’t be so much water at the foot of the combe,
for once they’ve uncovered the shaft, they’ve only
to bale to keep the water down: and five hours’
baling wouldn’t make all that mess.</p>

<p>“Again, I know they’re eight: but only four will
draw water as fast as we: and one of those—‘Rose’
Noble—has something better to do, for you can’t
command such a rabble and bear a hand as well.
Besides, I’ll stake my oath that, water to draw or
no, ‘Rose’ Noble’s still trying to find the way to
the <span class="it">oubliette</span>. And I think it more than likely that
they’re keeping an eye on the shoot.</p>

<p>“And last of all, they none of them know of the
bars. And that’s a fruit of a thought, for I’ll lay
my soul to a cesspool that, apart from anything
else, they’re short of a file.”</p>

<p>With that, he ordered Rowley to open a case of
champagne, “for, though,” said he, “I meant us
to drink it when the treasure had been won, now that
I come to think, we might not have time: and it
seems a pity to leave it for Ellis and ‘Rose’.”</p>

<p>I can relate his words, but I cannot describe the
way in which he spoke them, or the quiet, confident
manner with which he seemed to be putting Misfortune
to shame.</p>

<p>Enough that he lifted us up and carried us all
away.</p>

<p>And, since neither Hanbury nor I would wait for
the wine, Mansel himself brought a bottle to the
nose of the shaft and made us drink.</p>

<p>We worked straight through that night, and it
was eight the next morning before Mansel called a
halt. By then we had tunnelled four yards into the
live ground. This had meant working at a tremendous
pace, for we faithfully maintained its dimensions
and propped the shaft as we went. The heat was
awful, and the want of air most vile: but we had
grown used to these conditions, from which we had
begun to suffer as soon as we turned the shaft.
Still, we came down into the gallery, swaying like
drunken men, and Hanbury and Bell fell asleep over
their food.</p>

<p>Then Mansel told Rowley and me to take our
rest and said that he should take Tester and sleep
in the <span class="it">oubliette</span>. I believe he said something else,
for I remember laughing, but before my laughter
was over I was asleep.</p>

<p>Now how long Mansel slept I do not know, but
he woke us at noon, to say that he had sunk a crow-bar
at the nose of the shaft and had encountered
water four feet below its floor.</p>

<p>Except that he had found the chamber, he could
not have brought us more encouraging news, for
it showed that we had, at least, no vertical error to
fear and that, roughly, our floor was level with that
of the chamber itself.</p>

<p>In a moment, therefore, we were wide awake and
afoot and all agog to return to the nose of the shaft.
But of this Mansel would not hear, until we had all
of us bathed and broken our fast.</p>

<p>“Method in all things,” he said. “Disorder
never won yet and never will. We went off the
deep end last night, but we’re not going to do it
again. From now on we’ll labour by shifts: there’ll
always be four at work and one at rest. I don’t
know how much we can stand; but it won’t be for
long, and four hours on to one off seems the most
convenient rule.”</p>

<p>And, whilst we were eating, he outlined what must
be done to cope with a sudden attack.</p>

<p>“The one who is off duty must sleep in the
<span class="it">oubliette</span>. Tester will wake him all right, in the
event of attack. The moment he’s waked, he will
withdraw to the ramp—of course, taking Tester with
him—and close the postern gate. And he will hold
the ramp, while the others will hold the shaft. In
this way we shall have them between two fires, and,
if we don’t loose off too soon, it ought to be a walkover.”</p>

<p>Then he told us to mind how we went at the head
of the ramp, as well as at the mouth of the shaft,
because he had built two breastworks out of some
sacks of earth.</p>

<p>“Why, you can’t have rested at all,” cried
Hanbury.</p>

<p>“I had two full hours,” said Mansel, “and now
I’m to have one more. Chandos, what time do you
make it?”</p>

<p>I told him twenty past twelve.</p>

<p>“I shall be your relief,” said he. “I count upon
you to wake me at half past one.” I suppose I
hesitated, for he continued at once. “Unless you
give me your word, I shall not sleep.”</p>

<p>“I promise,” said I.</p>

<p>“Very good,” said Mansel. “But if, before then,
you strike oil—well, I don’t mind being called early
to hear the news.”</p>

<p>Five minutes later we were at the nose of the
shaft.</p>

<p>We had still five yards to go, before we should
come to the end of the belt of live ground: but,
though we went steadily forward, we now took to
searching right and left, by dint of driving a crow-bar,
as though it were a great nail, into the wall. Again
and again, by this means, we thought we had found
the chamber, but when we had laid bare the obstruction,
each time it proved to be some boulder or two
or three smaller stones. In this way the tunnel
began to lose its symmetry, and, though this could
not be helped, the propping of the roof with timber
became a less downright business and wasted a lot
of time.</p>

<p>We worked frantically, speaking very little, but
doing the best we could to maintain the system of
labour which should turn to the best account such
joint strength as we had.</p>

<p>The hewer stood on a sheet on to which his winnings
must fall. As soon as these began to encumber him
he would stand back and away: at once his assistant
would draw back the sheet from the face and lay
in its place another to catch the next fall of earth.
The assistant then disposed of the soil he had drawn
away, and by the time he was back the second sheet
would be full. The carpenter followed the hewer as
close as he could, pitching his uprights and cross-bars
and wedging them into place: and the fourth was
man of all work, now shovelling loose earth that had
fallen clear of the sheet or had not fallen, now helping
the carpenter, and now bringing up fresh wood.</p>

<p>An hour before his relief, each man had a pint of
champagne, and, when he was waked, was given a
quarter of an hour in which to bathe and eat.
Mansel fed Tester himself twice in the day, and that
was all the attention the poor dog had: yet he was
as good as gold, never obtruding himself as so many
dogs would have done, but seeming to know that
we were fighting with Time and faithfully keeping
to his post in the <span class="it">oubliette</span>.</p>

<p>By eleven o’clock that night we had advanced five
yards and were clear of the live ground.</p>

<p>It was impossible not to be disappointed and very
hard not to be dismayed. And, when I had called
for a crow-bar and, with three mighty blows,
slammed this up to its head into the nose of the
shaft, <span class="it">and touched not so much as a pebble</span>, I think
we all avoided each other’s eyes.</p>

<p>But Hanbury—for Mansel was resting—wasted no
time. By his direction we immediately withdrew
five yards and began to drive a new tunnel out of the
left-hand wall.</p>

<p>For no reason that I can offer, the half hour that
followed seems for me to stand out of that period
of toil and trouble; and I remember most vividly
the sob of the hewer each time that he launched his
pickaxe and the smell of sweat and the blinding
glare of the search-light and even a mark on a timber
retaining the left-hand wall. To our right, the five
yards we had won to no purpose continually mocked
us, like the Psalmist’s bulls of Bashan, gaping upon
us with its mouth: to our left, our long, clean-cut
gallery seemed to be leading fantastically into
another world. I can see Hanbury poising the
compass and hear him curse as his sweat fell on to
its dial: and, when Bell who was hewing, missed
his stroke, I remember snatching the pickaxe and
missing mine.</p>

<p>So the work went on; and the niche in the left-hand
wall had grown to an entrance, when Hanbury
looked at his wrist-watch and cried that my time
was up.</p>

<p>I stumbled back to wake Mansel and fall asleep
in his stead, for the champagne had done its business
and my knees were beginning to sag.</p>

<p>Almost at once Hanbury woke me, and I started
up with a cry.</p>

<p>“Have you found?”</p>

<p>“Found be damned,” says George. “You’ve
had five minutes over your time.”</p>

<p>So it was with us all: and we battled rather than
laboured, fighting with nature, like madmen, in our
effort to find the chamber before she could wear
us down. For the pace was too hot to last: we
all knew that: and unless we could win very soon,
we were playing a losing game. Yet we went
steadily on, like men in a dream, losing all count of
Time and confusing Night with Day. Indeed, the
demands of the battle so wholly possessed our
senses that, used in some other direction, these
were beginning to fail. We shouted, one to another,
when a whisper could have been heard: the hand
that could still ply a hammer, could not be trusted
to raise a glass to the lips: and, if ever I glanced at
my wrist-watch, this seemed a great way off.</p>

<p>At a quarter past nine the next morning, our new
shaft was eight yards deep. And this alone shows
that we were beside ourselves, for, though we had
cut down the width, relying upon the crow-bar to
make this good, such progress was superhuman.
Yet, to advance this shaft further seemed little
worth, and we started another tunnel out of its
right-hand wall. This by Hanbury’s direction;
for Mansel was resting, and we others knew no more
where to turn than the man in the moon.</p>

<p>“Are you certain,” said I, “that we’re not too
far to the left?”</p>

<p>“Certain,” said Hanbury. “Mansel will bear
me out. The shaft from the well to the chamber is
not so steep as we thought, so we’ve aimed too much
to the right. You mark my words: if we don’t
strike the chamber this time, we shall hit the shaft.”</p>

<p>Such confidence did us good: but, when I roused
Mansel, I saw him tighten his lips, and I knew that
he had been hoping to be sent for before his time.</p>

<p>I now know that I must have slept for nearly my
hour, when I dreamed I was listening to Mansel
broadcasting news and that a storm somewhere
was blotting out what he said. I must have
dreamed for some moments, for I was heavy with
sleep, but at last I awoke, to find Tester barking
like fury three feet away.</p>

<p>In an instant I had caught him up and had
blundered through the postern to fall headlong over
the breastwork with the dog in my arms. However
I was up in a moment and made haste to close the
gate: but I dared not fasten it closely, for fear of
a bomb.</p>

<p>I had much ado to quiet Tester, who was seething
with wrath; but, when I had done so and could
listen, I heard no sound.</p>

<p>So we lay still for five minutes: then I heard
Mansel’s voice.</p>

<p>“Are you at your post, Chandos?”</p>

<p>“I am,” said I.</p>

<p>“What happened?”</p>

<p>“I’ve no idea,” said I. “I woke up to find
Tester barking, and that’s as much as I know.”</p>

<p>“Stay where you are,” said he.</p>

<p>Then he unmasked the search-light and turned
the beam on to the trap. Presently he raked the
dungeon, letting the beam discover the timber and
piles of earth.</p>

<p>At length——</p>

<p>“Let Tester go,” he said. “And you come in.”</p>

<p>The dog ran to him at once and jumped up to lick
his face. Then he turned away and began to growl
and bristle, <span class="it">with his eyes on the trap</span>.</p>

<p>“Not much doubt about that,” said Mansel,
stooping to make much of the dog. “Our friends
have found the front door. I suppose they’re not
quite ready, and that that’s why they shut it again.
Well, we’re quite ready when they are, and, till then,
we may as well work.”</p>

<p>Then he sent me to bathe and eat, and, when I
came back, Hanbury was asleep in the dungeon,
with Tester in the crook of his arm.</p>

<p>We gave no more time to the riddle, for in truth
we had none to give. The business smacked of a
nightmare: yet, our present life was a dream: and
so, if we thought, we did not speak of it, but tacitly
took it for granted that Mansel’s interpretation was
good.</p>

<p>At six o’clock that evening we started another
shaft.</p>

<p>The last we had driven five yards, and had sunk
a three-feet crow-bar into its nose. <span class="it">And found
nothing.</span> And so at six o’clock we started another
shaft. This was driven from the nose of our second,
so that our original tunnel would soon be a left-handed
fork with three five-yard prongs.</p>

<p>And here I am bound to record that we were beginning
to fail. I will swear that the spirit was willing:
but the flesh was beginning to flag. It was nearly
forty-five hours since Mansel and I had returned from
our reconnaissance, and, though in that time we
had each had ten hours’ sleep, the reconnaissance
had come at the end of a full day’s toil. We had,
therefore, been jaded when we began to spurt:
and our spurt was losing its sting, because it did not
end.</p>

<p>We were beginning to fail.</p>

<p>I knew that my strength was failing, and tried to
conceal the fact. I fancy the others did the same,
for the collapse of one must mean the end of our
effort. The camel’s back would have broken: not
even Mansel could have carried another straw.</p>

<p>When I roused him at half past seven, he held
up two canvas kit-bags for me to see.</p>

<p>“The Burglar’s Delight,” said he, with half a
laugh.</p>

<p>I tried to laugh back, and lay down—but not to
sleep. And there was the surest sign that the end
was at hand, for it showed that the flesh was rebelling
against its chastisement.</p>

<p>When Mansel returned from the gallery, he stopped
to peer at me. I pretended slumber: but his
action showed me that he, too, had not slept.</p>

<p>I think the hour that followed was the worst I
have ever spent. I was so sick and weary that I
would have sold a kingdom for unconsciousness:
but this was steadfastly withheld: and, though at
times I fell into a kind of doze, this state was more
dreadful than my first, for then my brain was unruly
and flitted and gambolled, as a gnat on a summer’s
eve.</p>

<p>I was, indeed, thankful when Hanbury limped
into the dungeon and I could go back in his place.</p>

<p>The gallery we were now driving was completing
the uppermost prong of the letter E, the upright
of which was formed by our second shaft and the
base, or bottom prong, by the last five yards of our
first. But, because of all our soundings, the works
had a shapeless look and seemed to reflect the frenzy
with which they had been done. The roof and walls
were eccentric, and the timbers were all awry:
indeed the carpenter’s task was now fit work for a
wizard, and faithfully to prop and retain such
irregular excavation was almost impossible.</p>

<p>At half past ten that night our new shaft was two
yards deep. Mansel, Hanbury and I were working
alone, for Bell had just left to rouse Rowley and
take his place. And all was quiet; for Mansel had
stopped for a moment to drink his wine, Hanbury
was pencilling a timber, which he was going to saw,
and I, who was hewing, was extracting a morsel
of dirt, which had made its way into my eye.</p>

<p>At first I thought Hanbury’s pencil was making
a scraping noise: then I saw he had stopped and
was listening and that Mansel was doing the same.</p>

<p>For a moment no one of us moved.</p>

<p>Then Hanbury stepped to my side and set his
ear to a hole which the crow-bar had made a foot
back in the left-hand wall.</p>

<p>“That’s right,” said he, after a moment. “It’s
coming from here.”</p>

<p>Then he stood away, and I made play with the
pickaxe about the hole.</p>

<p>I had soon made a hollow, in which by sinking
the crow-bar we should gain another foot: but,
before we did this, Mansel tore off his zephyr and
folded it into a pad which should muffle the sound
of the blows.</p>

<p>Gently I drove the bar home, and could almost
have pressed it for the last foot of its way: and I
drew it out with my hands without any effort
at all.</p>

<p>The noise was distinct now—a thin, regular
murmur, as if someone was whetting a chisel upon
a hone.</p>

<p>What it was I could not imagine, and was just
beginning to think that our calculations had led
us to the top of the well, when Mansel let out a sob
and caught us each by an arm.</p>

<p>“<span class="it">My God, I’ve got it.</span>” he cried. “<span class="it">That’s the
chamber ahead.</span> <span class="sc">And they’re Filing the Bars.</span>”</p>

<hr />

<p>There is, I believe, a height at which a man’s
heart will break: and so, I suppose, there is a
pitch of excitement at which a man’s brain will
balk. And I think we had come to this: for Mansel
was trembling as a man smitten with an ague; if
I had tried to speak, I should have broken down;
and, while we were standing thus silent, Hanbury’s
knees sagged and he fell down in a swoon.</p>

<p>The faint was nothing, and, before I had brought
the bucket which was standing ten paces away,
George was again on his feet: but we made him
dip his head in the water, and then Mansel and I
did the same.</p>

<p>Then we fell to, like madmen, to deepen the breach
I had made.</p>

<p>We worked in what silence we could and let the
carpentry go: each of us hewed for two minutes,
while the others withdrew his winnings and strewed
them about the shafts: now and again we had to
employ the shovel, but mostly we used our hands, so
as to make less noise.</p>

<p>All the time the noise of the filing went steadily
on, only ceasing from time to time to instantly
recommence. Each time that it stopped our hearts
went into our mouths: for, close as we were, if once
the bars were severed, we might have been five miles
off for all the good we could do.</p>

<p>When Rowley came back, we told him and sent
him back to tell Bell.</p>

<p>“And say,” said Mansel, “that I may not arrive
when I should, but that, whatever happens, he must
remain where he is: for now the case is altered,
and he and Tester are holding our line of retreat.”</p>

<p>Rowley was back in two minutes and wild to take
his turn: and, once he had got it, he would not
surrender the pickaxe, and I had fairly to wrest it
out of his hands.</p>

<p>Now what the time was when it happened I do
not know—for I cannot tell to an hour how long we
took to cut through that last three feet—but I know
that I launched the pickaxe and its head went out
of my sight and that there I was, looking through
a hole into an empty space, beyond which, when they
gave me the light, I could see a stone wall.</p>

<p>It was the chamber indeed.</p>

<p>At once I saw that the well-diggers’ excavation
had been bigger than the chamber itself and that
they had not lined the cavity which they had dug,
but had built the chamber within it, like a box
within a box.</p>

<p>There was now no mistaking the whine of iron
biting iron, and it sounded to our frantic ears as
though whosoever was filing was nearing the end of
his task.</p>

<p>We, therefore, fell to, like fury, and soon had a
ragged window, I suppose, some three feet square,
opening into the cavern in which the chamber
stood.</p>

<p>A moment’s inspection now showed that the
chamber was round, like the well, and was plainly
constructed of stones which had been cut by the
masons to build the walls of the well. To break out
of the chamber, therefore, would have been ten
times as simple as to break in; for the stones were
undoubtedly wedge-shaped, and, that being so, if
they were truly laid, a battering-ram itself would
not avail us. The joints moreover, were as fine
as those of the walls of the well, and to cut
out one stone with a chisel would have taken an
hour or more.</p>

<p>“What of the roof?” whispered Mansel.</p>

<p>At once I stretched up an arm, to find the roof
just out of sight; but two minutes’ work with the
pickaxe had laid the edge of it bare.</p>

<p>Now how the roof was constructed I do not know;
but between the slab we could see and the stones
upon which it was resting, there was a layer of
mortar as thick as a Camembert cheese. And this
was so loose that I picked out a piece with my
thumb.</p>

<p>Here, then, was the way to break in: for we had
but to drive a chisel, and, when it was fairly in, to
lever against the slab, to prize a stone out of the wall:
and, once one stone was out, we could make our
breach.</p>

<p>“And, when we do,” breathed Mansel, “look out
for squalls: you can bet your life they’re not going
to give us this trick.”</p>

<p>We had to make way for the lever: so once more
I handled the pickaxe, whilst the others marshalled
the tools for the final assault.</p>

<p>All this time the filing continued, and, to judge
from the ring of the metal, some bar was nearly in
two. Indeed, as I threw down the pickaxe, again
the noise stopped, and we heard some blows
administered, as though the workman believed he
could burst asunder the filament that remained.</p>

<p>We waited to hear no more.</p>

<p>I fitted the edge of the chisel into the chink; and,
whilst I held it, Mansel hammered it home.</p>

<p>The stone below must have been loose, for, the
moment we levered, it yielded, and a second later I
pulled it out with my hands. The two below came
away, and, as Hanbury gave me the search-light, I
heard a strangled cry.</p>

<p>On the tiny floor was a bag, thick covered with
dust, of the shape of a sack of corn. Its mouth was
shut, but one of its sides was gaping and spilling the
stuff it held. By its side was another: but this was
all gone to ruin, and its contents lay in a heap. The
dust lay so deep over all that it might have been
trash, but I saw the shape of a crucifix standing up
out of the ruck.</p>

<p>Immediately opposite was the entrance, barred
by the four iron bars. Behind these I saw two
faces, unshaven, like those of beasts. The one I
had never seen, but the other was that of Ellis:
and that I believe I shall see so long as I live, for
if ever the devil possessed the soul of a man he
possessed it then.</p>

<p>The other seemed blinded by the search-light: but
Ellis glared full at the lamp, as though it were no
more than a taper, with his face working with passion
and his eyes starting out of his head.</p>

<p>Suddenly he laid hold of the bars and wrenched
them this way and that, screaming, like some animal
with rage; and, when they would not yield to his
frenzy, he clapped his face up against them and
spat like any demoniac, lending the whole force of
his body to this disgusting act. Then he started, as
one who recovers his presence of mind, and I saw
a hand fly to his hip.</p>

<p>At that moment Mansel fired, and the fellow fell
suddenly forward against the bars. As he did so,
the other man turned, and Mansel fired again. But,
when the noise had subsided, we could hear him
descending the shaft.</p>

<p>Then Ellis’ body slipped sideways, till the head
was against the wall, which held it up at an angle
which was different to that of the trunk.</p>

<p>“God forgive me,” said Mansel, “but I’d do it
again.”</p>

<p>With that, I climbed into the chamber, and Mansel
followed me in.</p>

<p>With the hammer and crow-bar, we soon had
three more stones out, and Hanbury made his
way in.</p>

<p>Then Mansel told Rowley to give him the canvas
bags.</p>

<p>“And ‘Quick’ ’s the motto,” said he. “I missed
the tanner, and now he’ll give the alarm. But,
once we’re beyond the postern, they can have the
<span class="it">oubliette</span>.”</p>

<p>Rowley had brought the bags and was standing
without the chamber, looking in, with his hands on
the wall, when I heard a rustle behind him and saw
him drop suddenly forward across the breach we had
made.</p>

<p>A mass of soil had broken away from the
‘window’ and had fallen on the back of his legs.</p>

<p>He was not hurt, but was pinned; and, whilst I
supported his body, Mansel and Hanbury climbed
back into the tunnel and shifted the fallen earth.</p>

<p>They worked feverishly; but two or three minutes
went by before he was free and I was able to help
him into the chamber.</p>

<p>“And that,” breathed Mansel, brushing the dirt
from his hands, “is about as clear a time-signal as
ever there was.”</p>

<p>I held one canvas bag open and Rowley the other,
while Mansel and Hanbury shovelled the stuff
within. There were gold and stones and jewels
and all manner of lovely things, but I think we were
thinking of safety and the way to the <span class="it">oubliette</span>.</p>

<p>Then Mansel lifted his head and touched Hanbury
on the arm.</p>

<p>For a moment we knelt there, listening.</p>

<p>Then, something faint, but clear, came Tester’s
vigorous bark.</p>

<p>And that was the only time we heard him give
tongue that night, for the next instant came a
shuffling and then a rumbling sound; and, when we
had brought the search-light up to the breach in
the wall, had we not known its angle, we could
not have told where the shaft we had driven had
been.</p>

<p>“Where’s the pickaxe?” said Mansel quietly.</p>

<p>I told him it had lain in the shaft.</p>

<p>Then came another rumble and the search-light
went out.</p>

<div><span class="pageno" title="279" id="Page_279"></span><h1>CHAPTER IX       OUT OF THE EATER</h1></div>

<p class="noindent"><span class="lead-in">Had</span> our doom been set forth upon paper and
submitted to ‘Rose’ Noble himself, for his
approval, I cannot believe that he would have
altered one particular.</p>

<p><span class="it">We were entombed alive: this, by our own act, with
the treasure under our hand, in the knowledge of an
attack upon one man and a dog, who would count in
vain upon our succour.</span></p>

<p><span class="it">Had we had the tools, we had no longer the strength
to hew our way back: indeed, to judge from the sound, it
seemed likely that ten or more yards of our tunnel had
fallen in. Yet, could we have performed this unthinkable
task, it would only have been to fall into the
enemy’s hands.</span></p>

<p><span class="it">And the other way out was barred: and beyond the
bars was the shaft, the mouth of which would be sealed
in less than an hour: and beyond the shaft was the
well, some ninety feet deep.</span></p>

<p>Mansel was speaking.</p>

<p>“The first thing to do is to keep calm: the second
is to break these bars. And now please don’t move
for a moment, or we shall collide.”</p>

<p>We heard him make his way to the entrance:
when he was there, he spoke again.</p>

<p>“Chandos, come here and lift Ellis. If I can
find it, we may as well have his torch.”</p>

<p>At once I moved to the entrance and, thrusting
my hands between the bars, seized the corpse under
its arms and endeavoured to lift it up. But it was
too heavy for me: so Mansel and Hanbury raised
me, whilst I held it against the bars.</p>

<p>The torch was alight in a pocket, into which the
dead man must have thrust it, so soon as he heard
our chisel enter the wall; and, when Mansel had
taken it out and had felt in the other pockets, he
told me to throw back the body away from the bars.
This I was thankful to do.</p>

<p>The entrance was a frame of hewn stone, eight
inches thick. In this the bars were set upright,
four inches apart: and, close to its foot, one was
filed almost through.</p>

<p>We cut this in two with the chisel without delay:
but, if we then expected that our release was at
hand we were grievously disappointed.</p>

<p>God knows what smith it was that wrought that
bar: but he was a craftsman that knew his mystery:
and I do not believe that such art is practised to-day.
Severed though it was, we could neither break
nor bend it: and, when we attempted to lever it
up with the crow-bar, we bent this into a hoop.</p>

<p>There lay the file within reach: but we could
not bear the thought of a labour so lengthy and
cudgelled our weary brains to find out some other
way.</p>

<p>Now the bars were all sunk, top and bottom, into
holes cut in the stone, and, though our treatment had
not displaced it, the upper portion of the bar we
had cut could now be turned round in its socket and
even moved up and down, and, but for the lower
portion, which opposed it, it would have come down
and away. Perceiving this, we determined to
loosen the lower piece, in the hope that we could
then raise this up, until it was clear of its bed, and
thus remove the whole bar, by simply reversing the
procedure by which it was undoubtedly set up.</p>

<p>It did not take long to loosen the lower portion,
but, either because the stonework itself had settled
or because, when the bars were planted, some trick
of masonry was used, we could not make enough play
to free this piece from its bed.</p>

<p>The knowledge that the water below was rising
fast and that the mouth of the shaft would soon be
sealed made it hard to give our minds to the problem
as freely as we would have wished and easy to return
to methods which we had already discarded as
forlorn. And this, I suppose, was the beginning of
panic. Be that as it may, I remember Mansel sitting
down with his head in his hands, whilst I leaned
against the wall, holding the torch and watching
Rowley filing like a madman and Hanbury, with the
hammer and chisel, trying to cut a channel out of the
stone.</p>

<p>Suddenly——</p>

<p>“Look here,” said Mansel rising. “Why don’t we
try the wall? It let us in, and why shouldn’t it
let us out? And, once we’re out, we can break
our way into the shaft.”</p>

<p>We should, of course, have attempted this long
before: but I suppose it was natural that the
entrance, so nearly open, should have attracted
and held the whole of our attention. But now we
saw that, provided the void we had found ran right
round the chamber, we should be without in a
moment and very probably able to make our way
past the entrance without having to displace any
earth. For the entrance was two feet wide: but
the shaft was three.</p>

<p>And so it fell out.</p>

<p>In less than five minutes, six more stones were
out of the chamber’s wall, and, when I stepped
through the new opening, there was the wall of
the shaft twenty inches away. To breach this was
very simple, yet took longer, I think, than even
Mansel had expected; for we had ruined the crow-bar
and dared not work too fiercely for fear of
spoiling the chisel or snapping the helve of the only
hammer we had. But at last we had made an
opening through which a man might pass.</p>

<p>While Mansel and I had been working, Hanbury
and Rowley had put what remained of the treasure
into the bags and had fastened their mouths. This
by Mansel’s direction, “for,” said he, “I know that
a man can take nothing out of this world, but, so
long as he’s in it, he may as well keep what he’s got.”</p>

<p>And there we were all with him, for, when you
have staked your life on some adventure, it is a
bitter business only to save your stake.</p>

<p>So we escaped from the chamber into the shaft,
taking the bags with us.</p>

<p>There was a rope fastened to one of the bars. I
suppose it had been bound there by the tanner, to
enable Ellis to make the ascent of the shaft: but
it stood us in very good stead, for the steps were
very irregular and covered with slime.</p>

<p>It was at once arranged that we should descend
one by one: for, rope or no, it was not a place to
play tricks in, and, if two used the rope together,
one, by slipping, might bring the other down.</p>

<p>I went first, dragging a bag behind me, and, when
I had reached the water, Hanbury followed me down.</p>

<p>The water was roughly one foot from the top of
the mouth of the shaft, and I could see a pale radiance
which I knew for that of the moon. The air, too,
was fresh, and, chill and dank as it was, because of
the depth of the well, I can never describe the
relief I found in breathing it, and I think it did more
to refresh me body and soul, than anything that had
happened since Mansel and I had found the water
at the foot of the combe.</p>

<p>So it was, I think, with us all. And of such, I
suppose, is the way of Providence; for, if ever four
weary men had need of comfort, we needed it then.</p>

<p><span class="it">Except for a plank, floating upon the water, the well
was as empty of gear as a blown egg.</span></p>

<p>I do not think we had counted on anything
else: we had, rather, deliberately refrained from
leaping, so to speak, until we were come to the ditch.
But we had hoped desperately to find something—some
rope or scaffolding which would have given
us a chance, if not of scaling the walls, at least of
rising with the water and so avoiding the most
miserable of deaths. But there was nothing at all:
and, though I went out with the torch and, getting
astride of the plank, recklessly raked the walls for
as far as the torch would light them—and that was
some thirty feet up—I might have spared my labour,
for they were as bare as my hand.</p>

<p>“Nothing?” said Mansel, as I came back to
the shaft.</p>

<p>I shook my head: and, as they helped me ashore
Hanbury and I, between us, let fall the torch, and
there was an end of that.</p>

<p>For perhaps two minutes we stood, with our
eyes on the water, already full four inches higher
than when I had seen it first ten minutes before.</p>

<p>Then I heard Mansel catch his breath.</p>

<p>“By thunder!” he cried. “We must be losing
our minds. What was the use of this plank without
two beams? They’re not afloat, because they’re
locked in the niches, but I’ll lay a monkey we find
them two feet down.”</p>

<p>With that, he dived and, after what seemed a long
time, came up with one of the rafters which Carson
and I had cut from the outhouse roof. In a moment
I had the other, and together we set them in the
niches which were now two inches above the water
line. Then we laid the plank across them, and, five
minutes later, the four of us were standing upon the
stage.</p>

<p>We had had a struggle to bring the bags out of
the shaft, for they were immensely heavy: indeed,
we had almost lost one: and this made us so uneasy
that Hanbury went back to the shaft and cut a
length from the rope and, with this, lashed them
loosely together, so that they could hang from a beam,
as a pair of saddle-bags slung on the back of a horse.</p>

<p>We did not sit down, for the plank was nearly
awash and very soon we should be able to raise the
stage: but, as I have said before, all the way up
the well the niches lay two feet apart, and, the
beams being heavy and we having nothing to stand
on, but only the water itself to buoy us up, we could
not raise the rafters as much as two feet at a time,
but must wait till the water had risen and made this
distance less.</p>

<p>So we stood in a row on the plank: and, when the
water was half way to the calf of my leg, we raised
the stage.</p>

<p>Again we had a battle to save the bags, for to
keep afloat ourselves during the transfer was
almost as much as we could do, and swapping horses
in mid-stream must be child’s play compared with
the struggle we had to raise ourselves and our
baggage twenty inches above the flood.</p>

<p>But at last it was over, and we were again on the
plank, with nearly an hour before us before we must
move again.</p>

<p>Enforced inaction, I suppose, never helped anyone.
But, sitting there in the darkness, we had nothing
to do but think. And, when I set down my thoughts,
I think I am revealing more or less what was in each
of our minds.</p>

<p>Our state was melancholy.</p>

<p>We were as cold now as, a short time before, we had
been hot. We had to chafe our fingers, to prevent
them from growing numb. Mansel was stripped to
the waist, and we were all drenched and dripping and
utterly worn out.</p>

<p>Of succour from without there was no hope at
all. Carson was miles away, and Bell, if indeed he was
not dead or captive, was holding the postern gate.</p>

<p>The water was rising at the rate of thirty inches
an hour: but this pace would not last for long, and
<span class="it">twenty-seven hours must elapse before we could climb
above the high-water mark</span>.</p>

<p>And, if by some miracle we could endure so long,
if, before then, the thieves had not returned to the
well, to find us waiting with the treasure, what then?</p>

<p><span class="it">Then we should still be thirty-four feet from the top
. . . thirty-four feet . . .</span></p>

<p>We had been confronted with three apparently
insuperable steps. First, we had been locked in
the chamber: yet we had escaped. Then we had
been trapped in the shaft: yet we had emerged.
And now we were down in the well. That is to say,
we had taken two of the steps, only to find that the
third was insuperable indeed.</p>

<p>I will not say that there was no more spirit in us,
but the figures with which we were faced would have
daunted any one. Twenty-seven hours of waiting:
twenty-five several battles to raise the stage: and
then—thirty-four feet which, unless some rope was
dangling, we could not possibly scale. And when,
after thirty minutes, Hanbury rose to his feet and
said quietly, “I’m sorry but I can’t stand this,” I
think we all understood.</p>

<p>“I’m going to try to climb up,” he added gravely,
“by means of the niches.”</p>

<p>“Steady, George,” said Mansel, laying a hand on
his arm. “The thing’s impossible. No one in our
condition could bring it off.”</p>

<p>“I’m going to try,” said Hanbury. “It may be
a chance in a million——”</p>

<p>“It isn’t that,” said I. “The niches come to
end ten feet from the top.”</p>

<p>There was a long silence: and presently Hanbury
sat down.</p>

<p>And how long we sat still then I cannot remember,
but I know that all of a sudden Rowley, who was
sitting beside me, gave a great start and then began
to laugh like a man at a play.</p>

<p>I laid hands upon him, for I thought he had lost
his wits. But as soon as he spoke I knew there was
nothing to fear.</p>

<p>“I’m sorry, sir, but it’s like a clown in the ring.
We’d sell our souls for a ladder, and <span class="it">we’re sitting on
one all the time</span>.”</p>

<p>There was a moment’s silence.</p>

<p>Then——</p>

<p>“Put it more clearly,” said Mansel. “I believe
I see what you mean.”</p>

<p>And that, I confess, was more than I could have
said.</p>

<p>“The beams, sir,” said Rowley. “We can set
them above one another, and then, when we’re all
on the top one, pull out the one below and lift up
that. And so on. I know there’ll be ten feet to
go, sir, when we get to the top: but it’s better than
waiting until—until we can’t wait no more.”</p>

<p>“It is, indeed,” said Mansel heartily. “Rowley,
I give you best. And when we get out, <span class="it">as we shall</span>,
I’ll thank you for saving my life.”</p>

<p>Then we all spoke at once and laughed and jested
and clapped Rowley on the back, as if we were souls
in a tavern and full of ale, instead of upon the brink
of the most hazardous endeavour that ever four
wretches made.</p>

<p>Then Hanbury slipped off the plank into the water,
and the rest of us straddled the beam over which the
kit-bags hung: and when he had freed the other,
he gave it to us, and we fitted it into the niches
two feet above.</p>

<p>Happily the beams were on edge, or they would
not have borne our weight: but, before ten minutes
were past, we would have given a fortune to have
had a third. Whether the plank would have helped
us, if we could have cut it down, I do not know:
but the chisel we had left by the chamber, and there
was a foot of water above the mouth of the shaft.
And since it could not have carried us, though it
might have served as a rail, we let it go.</p>

<p>When George had climbed out of the water, before
we went any further, we determined exactly the
system by which we must go. “For,” said Mansel,
“if ever an exercise required a military precision,
this is the stunt. We’ve only to make one mistake,
and we shan’t be in a position to make any more.”</p>

<p>The first thing which we decided was to preserve
the order in which we sat on the beam. Mansel was
sitting at one end, and Hanbury at the other, each
of them facing the wall: I was next to Mansel and
facing the same way as he, and Rowley was next
to George: and the bags hung in the middle,
between Rowley and me.</p>

<p>And, for the sake of convenience, I will do as
Mansel did then and number us off; so that he
became “Number One,” I became “Number Two,”
Rowley became “Number Three,” and Hanbury
“Number Four.”</p>

<p>Numbers One and Four were to move and take
their seats on the beam we had just set up. They
would then take hold of the niches two feet above,
to gain what stability they could. Numbers Two
and Three would then move and, between them, lift
up the bags, before moving up themselves. When
they were up and in place, Numbers Two and Three
would lean down, keeping their balance by holding
to One and Four, and, laying firm hold of the beam
which was resting below, would draw it out of the
niches and lift it up. They would bring it as far
as their shoulders and there lay it down, when
Numbers One and Four were to guide it home.</p>

<p>That was our method: and, though, looking back,
I think we might have done better, the devil was
driving, and so it had to serve.</p>

<p>Now at first all went like clock-work, and we must
have climbed twenty-six feet, before the depth below
us began to make itself felt.</p>

<p>I think we had all perceived that here was the
serious drawback to Rowley’s plan, for the highest
niches were nearly eighty feet up; but it was so
important that we should not lose heart that no one
had even hinted that a fear of falling might presently
supervene.</p>

<p>Be that as it may, I know that all of a sudden the
palms of my hands were dripping and I was afraid
to move. Rowley and I, between us, had lifted the
bags, and he had just taken his seat on the upper
beam, but I dared not change my position, for I
knew that, if for one instant I were to release my
hold, I should not be able to regain it, but must
inevitably fall.</p>

<p>By Mansel’s direction, I waited: and, after
two or three minutes the attack seemed to pass
away: but, a few minutes later came another, and
everything had to wait until I recovered my nerve.</p>

<p>I suppose my head was the weakest, for I was the
first to show fear: but presently Hanbury asked us
to give him two minutes’ grace, and, when at length
he moved and I turned to lift the bags, Rowley began
to tremble, and five more minutes went by before
he could play his part.</p>

<p>From then on, the ascent was a nightmare.</p>

<p>If we had had a third beam, it would not have been
so bad: but the rafters were very narrow and to
bestride the upper, without any handhold above to
help us to keep our seat, sometimes required such
an effort as we could scarcely make.</p>

<p>Again, it would have been better, if we had not had
to look down: but the dark motion of the water
was constantly catching the eye and reminding us
of the doom which one false movement would
evoke.</p>

<p>My hands ran so fast with sweat that I was
continually fearful of letting fall the rafter which
Rowley and I were to raise: and once, when my
end was free, but his would not leave its niche, I
had to let go of Mansel and put down my other
hand, because, if I had not done so, the beam must
have slipped from my grasp.</p>

<p>We dared not rest, if for no other reason, because
the depth below us seemed to feed upon delay; for,
so often as we waited for someone to recover his
nerve, the bare idea of moving seemed to become
monstrous and the renewal of the struggle a hazard
we could not take.</p>

<p>With this increasing horror came other fears:
and, though we spoke hardly at all, I think we
imagined vain things. Now a beam seemed to be
bending and now insecurely lodged: we supposed
one beam to have fallen, and saw ourselves trapped
in mid-air: we wondered if one of us fell, what the
others would do: behind all, the ten nicheless feet
to which we must come rose like some sinister cliff
where the wave of endeavour should be stayed.
But, while these apprehensions were transient, the
height at which we were working was always there,
and, what was worse, growing more obtrusive with
every move we made.</p>

<p>Yet we went on somehow, making our way up the
well, building our ladder as we went.</p>

<p>I do not remember feeling weary, but only most
stiff and sore: and, indeed, I find it astonishing
that we managed so well as we did; for, before we
had located the chamber, we were almost dead-beat,
and, when we were sitting on the plank, I was so
much exhausted that, if I had fallen off, I am sure I
should have sunk like a stone. Yet, though we were
not sprightly, we moved with a will, and I think it
must have been our nerves that kept us going, for
I do not believe that we had any physical energy left.</p>

<p>After a long time we could make out the top of
the well, for the light of the moon had vanished,
and it was very dark. And, with this, a new dread
came to plague us, namely, that the thieves would
return before we were up. And at times we made
sure we had seen the flash of a torch, and at others
that ‘Rose’ Noble was waiting and only letting
us carry the treasure up.</p>

<p>We had moved, I think, thirty-six times—but I
cannot be sure—and I had just taken my seat, when
Mansel spoke.</p>

<p>“This niche is my last,” said he. “Hanbury, do
you say the same?”</p>

<p>After a moment——</p>

<p>“Yes,” said Hanbury.</p>

<p>“Very good,” said Mansel. And then to me
“Carry on.”</p>

<p>So for the last time Rowley and I withdrew and
lifted the beam: and Mansel and Hanbury guided
it into place.</p>

<p>Then Mansel stood up and straddled it and ran
his hands over the wall: and Hanbury did the same.
But neither spoke, and presently both sat down.</p>

<p>“William,” said Mansel, looking up, “are you
sure we’re still ten feet down?”</p>

<p>“Certain,” said I. “I’ve marked it many a
time.”</p>

<p>“Well,” said he, with a sigh, “I’d rather be ten
feet down than thirty-four. Can anyone see the
chain?”</p>

<p>We could make out the windlass, but no one could
see the chain. “Let’s hope it’s dangling,” said
Mansel, “three or four feet away.”</p>

<p>With that, he and Hanbury descended and sat on
the lower beam: then they withdrew the upper and
gave it to me, and, while they and Rowley crouched
down, I turned the timber crosswise, in the hope, if
it was there, of striking the chain. But I encountered
nothing, and after a moment or two I was thankful
to give it up and to hear it slide back into place.</p>

<p>Then for a while we sat silent, continually gazing
upward at the rim of the well.</p>

<p>And then at last I perceived the only way. And,
wet with sweat as I was, when I saw it, I broke out
again. But it was the only way: and, after a little
discussion, we made the attempt.</p>

<p>Mansel and Rowley bestrode the upper beam,
this time facing each other, instead of towards the
wall. I stood between them, in the middle of the
lower beam. When they were ready, I put my
hands on their shoulders and mounted the upper
beam: and, when I was standing upright, I let
myself fall forward against the wall. This was but
three feet away. At once Hanbury mounted behind
me and stepped up on to my shoulders. This
brought his head to the level of the rim of the well,
and an instant later he was up and within the redoubt.</p>

<p>In a flash he was at the windlass and had let go
a length of chain. Then he locked the windlass
and, pulling the chain in by hand, lowered it so
that it hung between my face and the wall. I seized
it easily enough, and one minute later I was out of
the well.</p>

<p>Then we hauled up the bags and Rowley and,
finally, Mansel himself. And, when he was up,
with one consent we all lay down on the ground,
and no one of us moved or spoke for five minutes or
more. To tell the truth we were past speaking;
and I cannot set down our emotions, because, even
at this distance of Time, I can find no words which
can tell our gratitude and relief.</p>

<p>So we all surmounted the third insuperable step,
and, thanks to Mansel and Rowley, found ourselves
risen from the dead. For Mansel brought us into
the well, and Rowley taught us how to climb up,
and, though they both made much of what Hanbury
and I had done, I am afraid the depth of the well
lent our performance a glamour which it did not
deserve.</p>

<hr />

<p>The redoubt was deserted.</p>

<p>For this we were thankful: yet it quickened
our concern for Tester and Bell: and, when I
remembered ‘Rose’ Noble’s way with a hostage,
I felt uneasy indeed.</p>

<p>We were, all of us, streaming with sweat; so
Mansel took a shirt and a jersey, which he found
hanging up, and each of us took some clothing
against the cool of the night.</p>

<p>Then we passed into the meadow and took to
the woods.</p>

<p>We dared not go by the castle, but bore towards
the shrine, presently turning left-handed across
the road of approach. So we came down to the
river, which we made at a point not very far from
where Mansel had hidden the boat. To find this
took us some minutes, for, although we could see
the dawn coming, it was still very dark. But at
length I fell into a gully; and there it was.</p>

<p>Then Mansel gave Hanbury Ellis’ pistol, which
he had taken from the body before he descended
the shaft.</p>

<p>“You and Rowley,” he said, “stay here and
hang on to the bags, while Chandos and I take the
boat and scull to the shoot. What we shall find
I know no more than you: but what ever happens,
I think you must both sit tight, for I know I’m
too tired to swim, and we’ve been close enough to
drowning for the last three hours. And, as soon
as it’s light, I think I should dry that pistol as best
you can.”</p>

<p>With that, we launched the boat, and at once I
bent to the sculls.</p>

<p>When we came to the shoot, we listened: but,
except for the lap of the water, we could hear no
manner of sound.</p>

<p>Then Mansel took his pistol and, withdrawing
the magazine, took out the ammunition and wiped
it dry. There was a round in the chamber, and he
dried that as well. Then he reloaded the weapon,
and, when it was quite to his liking, he put up his
hand and rang the bell.</p>

<p>For a moment or two we sat waiting.</p>

<p>Then the flap was withdrawn.</p>

<p>Now whether it was Bell who had withdrawn it
or one of the thieves we could not possibly tell:
if it was one of the thieves, now was the moment
to enter, as ‘Rose’ Noble had done: but whoever
it was did not let down the ladder, and Mansel
dared not demand it, because at once his speech
would give him away.</p>

<p>Suddenly, to our great joy, we heard Tester let
out the grunt which he kept for matters suspicious,
whose claim to be passed in silence had yet to be
proved.</p>

<p>“Bell,” said Mansel at once.</p>

<p>“Sir,” said Bell.</p>

<p>“Where’s ‘Rose’ Noble?”</p>

<p>“In the <span class="it">oubliette</span>, sir. There’s four of them
there, <span class="it">an’ the innkeeper’s pulled up the rope, so they
can’t get out</span>.”</p>

<p>“But the postern?”</p>

<p>“Carson’s holding that, sir. When you didn’t
come, I thought I’d best bring him here.”</p>

<p>“Well done, indeed,” said Mansel. “And now
let down the ladder, and I’ll come up.”</p>

<p>Then he gave me his pistol and told me to pick
up the others and row them across the river, treasure
and all.</p>

<p>“And then come back here,” said he, “as soon
as you can: for this is the last lap, and, between
you and me, I’ve a fancy to win the race.”</p>

<p>With that, he went up the ladder, and I sculled
back to the others as fast as I could.</p>

<p>Hanbury and Rowley could hardly believe my
news: and, indeed, to me it seemed almost too
good to be true, for that Bell and Tester should be
safe smacked of the supernatural, but that ‘Rose’
Noble should have permitted himself to be snared
was almost inconceivable.</p>

<p>I was back at the shoot in ten minutes, and at
once Bell lowered the bucket full of our clothes.
Then he let down food and wine, and, lastly, a
medley of things—arms and papers and money
and <span class="it">Lockhart’s Life of Scott</span>. Finally, he descended
and proposed to row me across and then himself
to return for Mansel and Carson. But I had him
across the river, before he had got on his clothes,
and, when he had unloaded the boat, I sculled
back for the last time.</p>

<p>I arrived to find Carson throwing down our last
coil of rope, and, after a little, he descended, with
Tester under his arm. Almost at once the rope-ladder
fell into the water, and, an instant later,
Mansel slid down the shoot.</p>

<p>He would not enter the boat, but laid hold of
the painter and bade me bend to the oars.</p>

<p>So soon as we were ashore, we sank the boat; and,
two minutes later, we all set out for the culvert, bearing
our treasure with us, like men in a fairytale.</p>

<p>The dawn was up, but we held to the road, for
to make our way across country was beyond our
power. As it was, we lurched and staggered, and
once I fell asleep walking and, taking no note of
a bend, fell into the ditch. Yet Mansel drove us
on, “for,” said he, “I’m not going to be caught
at the post. There’s the postern and the shoot
and the river between them and us: but four of
us are no better than dead men, and I couldn’t hit
‘Rose’ Noble at seven feet. And there you are.
I’m sorry to spoil your outlook, but we’ve got to
be in France before sunset, and there’s quite a long
way to go.”</p>

<p>At last we came to the culvert.</p>

<p>There we left the rifles, bestowing them under
the arch. And then, without more ado, we all
climbed into the Rolls, and Carson drove us to
Villach as fast as he could.</p>

<p>There we only waited to take up the second car:
and Bell was set to drive this, because, after Carson,
he was the least fatigued.</p>

<p>Ten miles short of Salzburg we stopped; and,
when we had done what we could to order our
appearance, we emptied the Rolls’ tool-box and
packed within it so much of the treasure as we
could make it hold. It was a capacious coffer,
but, when it was full, there still remained a good
deal: most of this we hid in the tire of one of the
two spare wheels, and what was still left we concealed
about ourselves.</p>

<p>All this because of the Customs: for we knew
very well that, if it was found at a frontier that we
were laden with jewels, we should be certainly
stopped and those in authority informed.</p>

<p>And here, for the first time, I perceived that,
though we had lifted the treasure, we stood in
imminent danger of losing every ounce; for, if
once its existence came to the knowledge of the
State, all the resources of the Law would be employed
to prevent six foreigners from abducting so considerable
a fortune.</p>

<p>This peril shocked me so much that I besought
Mansel to wait and to let us dispose the treasure
in some less conspicuous place. But he would
not listen.</p>

<p>“I dare not wait,” said he, “because of ‘Rose’
Noble. I’m not afraid of him, because now we’ve
had some sleep: but I don’t want a brush with
him in a public place. Whatever the outcome was,
explanations would have to be made. <span class="it">And we’re
not in a position to explain.</span> Nobody is, when he’s
carrying stuff like this. As for the Customs, we’ve
as good a chance there to-day as we should have
next week. I shan’t enjoy the passage, but it’s
got to be made. As far as the tool-box is concerned,
I’ll give you an excellent rule: if you’ve something
to hide, always hide it in the most obvious place.
And now don’t worry. If you can’t go to sleep,
look inexpressibly bored. And please try not to
perspire. Perspiration is the emblem of an uneasy
mind.”</p>

<p>If that was a true saying, the officials who dealt
with us were an inobservant lot, for, while they
examined the Rolls, the sweat ran down my face.
But Mansel paid the dues with an injured air, and,
after a little delay, they let us pass.</p>

<p>So we entered Germany: and at half past five
that evening we came to France.</p>

<p>And here I thought all was over, for they turned
us out of the car and took up the cushions and
carpet and opened the petrol-tank. They did not
open the tool-box, <span class="it">because they saw Mansel do that</span>.
I saw him do it, too, and thought he was out of
his mind. He took out one of the rubbers with
which we had covered the treasure and then put
a foot on the tool-box and started to dust his
shoes, talking politics all the time with the Frenchman
in charge and becoming so engrossed in his
discourse that the search had been done and we
were back in the car, before he had finished his
dusting and put his rubber away.</p>

<p>And, when later we spoke of the matter with
bated breath, he merely observed that prevention
was better than cure.</p>

<p>“But you must have been worried,” cried
Hanbury.</p>

<p>“Worried?” said Mansel. “I think it took a
year off my life.”</p>

<p>And there you have Jonathan Mansel.</p>

<p>Master of many things, he was especially master
of himself. His self-control was so perfect that
those who knew him best could no more read his
heart than they could look through a plate of
armour of proof. Add to this that he could think
twice as swiftly as other men, and you will see the
disadvantage at which his enemies stood. When
we were in any trouble, because he was wiser, he
saw more clearly than we the depth of the risk
we ran: yet he was always the coolest, the most
confident, the most matter-of-course. With it all,
he was never secretive. All his movements were
gentle: yet he had the strength of two men. He
was most unassuming and generous: yet was most
plainly revered wherever he went.</p>

<p>I never knew, till long after, that, when he
became lame, as the result of a wound, he lost his
balance and so his head for heights, and that, from
that time on, it troubled him to so much as look
down from a balcony on to a garden below. Yet
on that awful night he came up the great well and
gave no indication then or at any time of the
agony he must have suffered from this terrible
thorn in the flesh.</p>

<p>At Strasbourg we turned South, and, when we
were deep in the country, we took a little by-road
which led to a wood. There we spent the night.
And at eight o’clock the next evening we reached
Dieppe.</p>

<p>So I came back to England the way I had come
some seventy days before, with the dog-collar in
pocket and my heart in my mouth.</p>

<hr />

<p>And here, before I go any further, I will set down
Bell’s tale.</p>

<p>He had heard the trap open, for he had not been
asleep, and he and Tester had at once withdrawn
to the ramp. No bomb had been thrown, but four
men had at once descended into the <span class="it">oubliette</span>. One
of these was ‘Rose’ Noble, and another the
tanner, for he had passed close to the postern,
and Bell had observed the odour which hung about
him. Almost at once they had all gone into the
shaft. They were a long time gone, and, before
they came back, some one else had descended and
followed them in.</p>

<p>Suddenly Bell had heard the unmistakable cry of
a man in terror of death. This came from the shaft.</p>

<p>At once a spout of German had burst from the
trap, and, since he could hear two voices, Bell knew
that they must be those of the tanner’s allies.
Their tones were plainly apprehensive, and again
and again they repeated the name “Johann”:
and at last Bell gathered that the cry must have
come from the tanner and that <span class="it">the two at the trap
were suspecting foul play</span>.</p>

<p>Sure enough, when the thieves returned, as they
presently did, and ‘Rose’ Noble commanded the
landlord to draw him up, the latter demanded
“Johann”: and, when the thieves sought to
bluff him, made it plain in pitiful English that <span class="it">he
and the tanner’s brother would take no one of them
up until they heard “Johann’s” voice</span>.</p>

<p>Now what in the world we were doing Bell could
not tell, but supposed we were holding the chamber,
instead of the shaft: and, since, if they could not
get up, the thieves were certain to try to force the
postern, he decided to summon Carson to help him
to hold the ramp.</p>

<p>He, therefore, whipped down to the gallery and,
opening two of the windows, turned on our electric
light, and then sped back to the postern to witness
a turbulent scene, the thieves roaring orders and
threats, and the innkeeper and his companion
hurling down taunts and abuse. Then somebody
fired at the trap, and at once, as though in answer,
the rope came tumbling down on to the stile.</p>

<p>Then ‘Rose’ Noble had turned upon Punter
and rent him for leaving the trap, and Punter had
cursed ‘Rose’ Noble for taking the tanner’s
life. But ‘Rose’ Noble declared with an oath
that the tanner had hoaxed them.</p>

<p>“He’s done in Ellis,” he said, “and the bags
are down in the shaft. He was meaning to box
us here and then go back with his fellows and
pouch the lot. And, if we don’t get out of this
hole, those other two black-blooded rats will have
it yet.”</p>

<p>“But where’s the Willies?” cried Job.</p>

<p>The question confounded Bell, but appeared to
sober the thieves: for at once they lowered their
voices, clearly believing that we were all in the
ramp and presumably fearing that we should leave
by the shoot and make for the well.</p>

<p>Presently Job had approached and endeavoured
to force the postern, and, while he was so engaged,
Bell shot him dead.</p>

<p>At once the other three had retired to the shaft,
from which Bell fully expected that we should soon
drive them out. But when presently Carson
arrived, yet there was no sign of our coming, he
could not think what had happened and began to
fear very much that some accident had occurred.</p>

<p>When Carson heard his story, he had at once
decided that Bell must take some rest and that,
if in three hours’ time, we had not appeared, they
must force their way into the shaft, to see what
the trouble might be. But, before, that time had
expired, we had come to the shoot.</p>

<p>Four several times the thieves had approached the
postern; but, I suppose, no one of them was
minded to give his life for the other two; for a
frontal attack alone could have been successful,
and that they did not make.</p>

<p>In the hope of reducing their number, Carson
had held his fire as long as he dared, but, though he
had wounded Punter, they gave him no other
chance.</p>

<p>So, in the end, ‘Rose’ Noble’s astonishing
instinct overleaped itself: for, had he not slain
the tanner, finding the fellow guilty of something
he had not done, he must, I think, have had the
treasure and four of us into the bargain.</p>

<hr />

<p>There is little more to be told.</p>

<p>On the way from Newhaven to London we
stopped in a lonely place and put the treasure back
into the canvas bags. And, when we reached
Cleveland Row, we carried it up and laid it in
Mansel’s flat. And there, for the first time, we
saw what it was we had won.</p>

<p>The spoil was that of a robber of high estate.</p>

<p>There was nothing common, and, except for a
small bag of gold, no coinage at all.</p>

<p>There were jewels of all descriptions and many
loose precious stones. There were brooches and
clasps and circlets: there were cups and the hilts
of poniards, studded with gems: there were two
crucifixes and a monstrance and the crook of a
pastoral staff, the presence of which, had he been
charged with sacrilege, Axel the Red might have
found it hard to explain: there was a golden chessboard,
with ruby and emerald chessmen, as fine as
you please: there was a scourge, the seven cords
of which were loaded with seven diamonds, the
size of full-grown grapes. There were jewelled
dice and bracelets and eighteen or twenty rings:
there were images and girdles and a golden
hunting-horn: but most lovely of all was a
triptych, whose three little, sacred pictures were
done like stained-glass windows, only with precious
stones.</p>

<p>When we had examined it thoroughly, we packed
it all into a plate-chest and lodged it at Mansel’s
bank.</p>

<p>And there, I suppose, our adventure came to an
end.</p>

<p>Most of the treasure we sold, but Mansel, Hanbury
and I each kept some one of the gems. They made
me take the triptych, because the secret of Wagensburg
had been bequeathed to me. And I have
lent it to a Museum, because, to be honest, I dare
not house it myself.</p>

<p>For what we sold we received nine hundred
thousand pounds, “which is very much less,” said
Mansel, “than what it is worth: but that cannot
be helped, for I never was any good in the counting-house,
and, from what I’ve seen of you two, you’re
worse than I.” And, indeed, for my part, if I had
been told it was worth but half a million, I should
have been none the wiser and perfectly content.</p>

<p>Of this huge sum Mansel, Hanbury and I took
each two ninths for himself and Carson, Rowley
and Bell received one ninth apiece.</p>

<p>To my great surprise, when Bell had been given
his cheque, he said that, if I was content to keep
him, he had no wish to leave my service; when
I pointed out that he was now a man of means,
he said that, for his part, that did not alter the
case; and since Hanbury and I were proposing to
share an estate in the country, I told him to
take a holiday and report to me in three weeks’
time.</p>

<p>Both George and I found it hard to part with
Mansel: and, when the latter suggested that we
should come down to Hampshire and spend a week
with him there, we were only too glad to accept.</p>

<p>And there, in the midst of the New Forest, he
brought us back to the world; for our doings of
the last two months had thrown our focus out, and,
when we looked upon the future, this seemed
intolerably grey. But Mansel pointed the virtue
of quiet enjoyment, maintaining that only those
who knew the quality of peace could, when the
moment came, taste the full flavour of battle:
“for,” said he, “for the last two months we have
been against the peace, and that is a condition
which is all very well for a time but, if it is too much
prolonged, will surely lose its sweetness and, what
is infinitely worse, will sour the years that are left
in the cellar of Life.”</p>

<p>So he did us an enduring service, for, but for that
week in Hampshire, I do not think that either
George Hanbury or I would ever have settled
down, but, having the means to do so, would have
gone out to rove the world in search of more
excitement and so have dropped substance for a
shadow and thrown our birthrights away.</p>

<p>As it is, I can now look back upon those seventy
days as a man regards some picture, the contemplation
of which never fails to bring him infinite
delight: for they stand clean out of a quiet, orderly
existence and, by the contrast, gain immeasurably.</p>

<p>Their burden is as vivid to-day as it was that
sunshiny morning when we unloaded the tool-box,
not far from the London road—the murder of the
Englishman, and the quiet contempt of his prophecy
that Ellis would come to grief: the level-crossing,
and the fierce pounding of my heart as we sat
awaiting the train: the courtyard of Wagensburg,
and Mansel against the lime-tree with ‘Rose’
Noble stretched at his feet: the ear-splitting crash
of the bomb, and Mansel’s steady voice calling the
roll: the heat of the closed car’s engine scorching
my back: the smell of tanning, and Tester’s
menacing bark: ‘Rose’ Noble’s weight upon me,
and his heavy breathing as he set out to take my
life: our last, stupendous effort to reach the
chamber, and Ellis dead and staring against the
bars: and then, our terrible battle with that most
jealous of wardens, the great well.</p>

<p>The memory of these things I find as valuable
as my share of the treasure itself, and I doubt if
ever a man was so well paid for undertaking the
care of a masterless dog.</p>

<p>The latter is with me always, and I think her
life is happy. I have called her ‘Rafter;’ for, as
the name of a dog, the word does well enough,
while it will always mean a great deal to me.</p>

<p>And here I may say that Tester was more fortunate
than she, for he never went into quarantine, but,
instead, into the tool-box of the second car, to
emerge upon Ashdown Forest with, to judge from
his spirits, a new lease of life. But, then, he was
a hardened smuggler, and had cheated the Customs
this way a dozen times.</p>
